                                                                                REPORTABLE
                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 49 OF 2021
              (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 298 OF 2021)
                               (DIARY NO. 4183 OF 2020)

CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE U.P. .....APPELLANT
MILK UNION & DAIRY FEDERATION
CENTRALIZED SERVICES
                                                  VERSUS
JAGPAL SINGH ....RESPONDENT

                                    J U D G M E N T
HEMANT GUPTA, J.

1. The challenge in the present appeal is to an order passed by the
        Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad,
        Lucknow Bench dated 26.8.2019, affirming the order passed by the
        learned Single Bench on 17.5.2019.

2. The writ petition filed before the High Court was to assail an order
        of punishment dated 26.10.2018, whereby the respondent1 was
        ordered to be reverted to the minimum pay scale and the period of
        suspension was to be considered as a period spent by the
        employee in service. However, for the said suspension period, the
        employee was not found to be entitled to any other pay or
        allowance except subsistence allowance and dearness allowance.
        The order of punishment was passed after the prior approval of the

1 hereinafter referred to as 'employee'

        Commissioner (Dairy Milk), Lucknow, designated as Registrar by
        the State Government on the same day.
3. The employee was appointed as Executive Trainee in the
        Centralised Services on 11.8.1984. After completion of the training
        period, he was appointed as Manager Grade-III. The employee was
        served with a charge sheet dated 21.4.2015, inter-alia, on the

        ground that in addition to two chambers of milk in tankers, one
        more additional third hidden chamber having capacity of 310 liters
        was created by partition. Water was filled in the said additional
        chamber to maintain total weight of the vehicle. After weight
        measurement at the time of unloading of milk from the two
        chambers, water from the additional hidden chamber was
        discharged. On account of manipulation in the weight
        measurement, the Federation suffered financial losses. The
        employee controverted the said allegations and thus an Inquiry
        Officer was appointed. In the Inquiry Report dated 13.6.2018,
        charges nos. 1 and 3 were found to be partially proved against the
        employee. The Inquiry Report was then forwarded to the employee
        along with a show cause notice on 25.6.2018. An opportunity of
        personal hearing was also afforded to him. It is thereafter that the
        Managing Director/ Chairman (Administrative Committee) passed
        an order on 26.10.2018 holding the employee guilty of all the three
        charges and passed an order of punishment, as mentioned above,
        after obtaining approval from the Commissioner (Dairy Milk)/
        Registrar, Dairy Milk Co-operatives, U.P. on 26.10.2018. It is the

        said order which was challenged by the employee by way of a writ
        petition before the High Court.
4. The learned Single Bench while deciding the Writ Petition held that
        the order of punishment was passed without following the due
        procedure of law, four days prior to the retirement of the employee.
        There was an undue and unexplained haste in passing the
        impugned order without taking prior approval under Regulation 87
        of the Service Regulations from the competent authority i.e., the
        Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Institutional Service Board. It was
        further held that the punishment order has been passed by the
        Chairman of the Administrative Committee and the approval for the
        punishment has also been granted by the same person. Therefore,
        the present case was found to be an example of inappropriate
        approval given by an incompetent authority.
5. In the intra-court appeal, the Division Bench of the High Court
        referred to the inquiry reports dated 9.5.2014 and 15.10.2014 to
        hold that the employee has not been given any disagreement note,
        rather he was exonerated in those reports. However, it is to be
        noted that the Division Bench overlooked the fact that they were
        preliminary inquiries. The Division Bench considering the
        Regulations 87 and 106 of the Service Regulations held as under:
                "15. On due consideration of the aforesaid, it is clear that
                basic requirement is that the order should not be
                inconsistent to the Regulations of 1975 and the order dated
                08.08.2016 is in direct conflict to the provisions as contained
                under Regulation 87 of the Regulations of 1975. The
                respondent-petitioner was a member of Centralized
                Services, which were promulgated by the U.P. Dairy
                Federation & Milk Union Centralized Services Rules, 1984,

                which came into existence after a period of more than five
                years and, therefore, the notification dated 17.11.1979
                cannot be applicable to the members of Centralized Services
                and, as such, the analogy given by the Milk
                Commissioner/Registrar while passing the order dated
                08.08.2016 is incorrect."
6. Before we consider the respective arguments and the findings of
        the High Court, some of the statutory provisions are reproduced
        hereunder for appreciation of the contentions raised:

                "UTTAR PRADESH CO-OPERATIVE SOCIEITES ACT, 19652
                121. Power of Registrar to determine terms of
                employment of society. - (1) The Registrar may, from time
                to time, frame regulation to regulate the emoluments and
                other conditions of service including the disciplinary control
                of employees in a co-operative society or a class of co-
                operative societies and any society to which such terms are
                applicable, shall comply with those regulations and with any
                orders of the Registrar, issued to secure such compliance.
                (2) The regulations framed under sub-section (1) shall be
                published in the Gazette and take effect from the date of
                such publication.
                122. Authority to control employees of co-operative
                societies. - (1) The State Government may constitute any
                authority or authorities, in such manner as may be
                prescribed, for the recruitment, training and disciplinary
                control of the employees of co-operative societies, or a class
                of co-operative societies, and may require such authority or
                authorities to frame regulations regarding recruitment,
                emoluments, terms and conditions of service including
                disciplinary control of such employees and subject to the
                provisions contained in Section 70, settlement of disputes
                between an employee of a co-operative society and the
                society.
                (2) The regulations framed under sub-section (1) shall be
                subject to the approval of the State Government and shall
                after such approval, be published in the Gazette, and take
                effect from the date of such publication and shall supersede
2 for short, the 'Act'

                any regulations made under Section 121.
                3122-A. Centralisation of certain services.- (1)
                Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State
                Government may by rules provide for the creation of one
                there services of such employees of such co-operative
                societies or class of co-operative societies as the Stale
                Government may think fit, common to such co-operative
                societies and prescribe the method of recruitment,
                appointment, removal and other conditions of service of
                persons appointed to any such service.
                (2) When any such service is created, all employees of such
                societies existing on the dale of creation of such service on
                the posts included in such service, shall be deemed to have
                been provisionally absorbed in the service. with effect from
                the date of creation of such service:
                Provided that any such employee may, by notice in writing
                to the prescribed authority within the prescribed period,
                intimate his option of not becoming a member of such
                service, and in that event his services in the society shall
                stand determined with effect from the date of such notice
                and he shall be entitled to compensation from the society
                which shall be-
                              xx xx xx
                Section 130. Power to make rules.-
                (1) the State Government may, make rules to carry out
                         the purposes of this Act.
                 (2) xx xx xx
                THE UTTAR PRADESH CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
                RULES, 19684
                2. Definitions- In these rules, unless the context otherwise
                requires ----
                (a) *** ***
                (b) "Apex Society", "Apex Level Society" or "State Level Co-
                operative Society" means-
                (1) to (3) ******

3 subs.by U.P. Act 17 of 1977 (w.e.f.3-10-1975)
4 for short, '1968 Rules'

                (4) Pradeshik Co-operative Dairy Federation Ltd.,
                Lucknow;
                              xx xx xx
                *[389-A. The authority or authorities under Section 122
                may be constituted by the State Government by notification
                published in the Official Gazette]
                * substituted by Notification No. 3885-C/XII-CA-5(1)-69-B, dt. Aug. 31,
                1971, published in the U.P. Gaz., Extra., dt. 31st Aug., 1971, p.2."

7. In terms of Section 122 of the Act and Rule 389-A of the 1968
        Rules, a notification was issued on 4.3.1972 constituting Uttar
        Pradesh Co-operative Institutional Service Board for the purposes
        of recruitment, training and disciplinary control of the employees of
        apex level, central or primary societies. Later, the Uttar Pradesh
        Co-operative Societies Employees Service Regulations, 19755 were
        published in the U.P. Gazette, Extraordinary on 6.1.1976 in exercise
        of the powers conferred under Section 121 of the Act. Some of the
        relevant provisions read thus:

                "2(iii) 'appointing authority' means "Committee of
                Management" or any other authority which is empowered
                under these regulations or the bye-laws of the society
                concerned to make appointment;
                (iv) 'Board' means the U.P. Co-operative Institutional Service
                Board;
                (v) to (viii) *** ***
                (ix) 'Co-operative Society' means a Co-operative Society
                placed under the purview of the Board by Government
                Notification No. 366-C/XII-C-3-36-71, dated March 4, 1972,
                as amended from time to time by notifications issued under
                Section 122 of the Act read with Rule 389(a) of the Rules.

5 for short, the 'Service Regulations'

                              xx xx xx
                87. Order imposing penalty under sub-clauses (e) to (g) of
                clause (1) of Regulation No. 84 shall not be passed except
                with the prior concurrence of the Board."

8. Regulation 84 of the Service Regulations provides for penalties
        such as reduction in rank or grades held substantively by the
        employee (clause e), removal from service (Clause f), or dismissal
        from service (Clause g). As per Regulation 87 of the Service
        Regulations, the aforesaid punishment could not be passed except
        with the prior concurrence of the Board.
9. It may be stated that all the powers of Registrar in respect of all
        Co-operative Milk Societies were conferred on the Milk
        Commissioner Uttar Pradesh by the State Government vide
        notification dated 19th May, 1976 in exercise of powers conferred
        under sub-section 2 of Section 3 of the Act.
10. The Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Institutional Service Board ceased
        to have jurisdiction to operate regarding recruitment, training and
        disciplinary control of the employees of the Apex Level Milk Society
        i.e. Pradeshik Co-operative Dairy Federation, Central or Primary
        Milk Societies vide notification dated 17.11.1979 issued under
        Section 122 read with Rule 389-A of the 1968 Rules. Instead, a
        Selection Committee for recruitment of Category I and II
        employees, as specified by the Registrar from time to time, was
        constituted. Such Selection Committee consisted of an officer
        nominated by the State Government as Chairman; a representative
        of the National Milk Dairy Development Board, Principal Agricultural

        Institute, Naini, Allahabad and one Chairman of a Co-operative Milk
        Union or Central Milk Society in the State nominated by the State
        Government as Members; and Managing Director, Pradeshik Co-
        operative Dairy Federation as Member Secretary.

11. The Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Dairy Federation and Milk Union
        Centralised Service Rules, 19846 came to be published in the U.P.
        Government Gazette on 29.8.1984. As per the said Rules, the
        Administrative Committee was to consist of a Managing Director of
        the Federation, a nominee of the Registrar not below the rank of
        Class I Officer, a nominee of the Managing Director of the
        Federation and a Member Secretary. Some of the relevant
        provisions of the Dairy Service Rules read as under:
                "2(a) "Act" means the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies
                Act, 1965.
                (b) "Authority" means the Cadre Authority as constituted in
                accordance with rule 4 of these rules;
                (c) "Board" means the Committee of Management of the
                Pradeshik Co-operative Dairy Federation Ltd., Lucknow (and
                includes the Administrator or the Committee of
                Administrators of the Federation);
                (d) "Committee" means the Administrative Committee
                constituted in accordance with rule 5 of these rules;
                (e) "Federation" means the Pradeshik Co-operative Dairy
                Federation Ltd., Lucknow;
                (f) to (l) *** ***
                3. Creation of Service. - (1) Uttar Pradesh Co-operative
                Dairy Federation and Milk Unions Centralised Service shall
                consist of all the managerial posts of the Federation and the
                Unions except the post of Managing Director, Chief
6 for short, the 'Dairy Service Rules'

Commercial Manager and Chief General Manager of the
Federation.
(2) No appointment shall be made to any of the posts falling
within the purview of the service by the Federation or Union
from the date of enforcement of these rules:
        Provided that the Government may place on
deputation any officer of the Government on any managerial
post of the federation or Union:
        Provided further that the services of the persons
already in the employment of another, Co-operative Society,
or a corporation or undertaking owned or controlled by the
central or State Government or a body corporate
administering a local fund or National Dairy Development
Board may also be taken on deputation.
4. Constitution of Cadre Authority. - The Cadre Authority
shall be constituted as under:
(i) The Registrar ...Chairman
(ii) to (viii) *** ***
(ix) Managing Director of the Federation ...Member-Secre-
tary
         Note. - In case the post of the Registrar and the Manag-
ing Director of the Federation is held by the same officer, the
Chairman may nominate any member as Member-Secretary
and the vacancy of member so caused shall be filled by nomi-
nation of any other officer or the Federation by the Managing
Director.

5. Constitution of Administrative Committee. - The
Administrative Committee shall be constituted as under:
(i) Managing Director of the Federation - Chairman
(ii) A nominee of the Registrar not below the rank of Class I
Officer - Member
(iii) A nominee of the Managing Director of the Federation -
Member-Secretary.
             xx xx xx
9. Powers and duties of the Authority. - (1) The
Authority with the prior approval of the State government

                shall frame regulations relating to recruitment, training,
                emoluments, disciplinary control and other conditions of
                service of the members such regulations shall come into
                force from the date of their publication in the Gazette.
                (2) The Authority shall-
                (i) determine and modify, from time to time, the scales of
                pay for different category of posts, with the approval of the
                Registrar;
                (ii) settle the dispute and allocate the cost of training,
                travelling allowance, salary and other allowances for the
                period of training and the cost of recruitment under sub-rule
                (6) of rule 22;
                (iii) advise the Government and the Registrar on matters
                relating to the Service;
                (iv) decide such policy matters concerning the Service as
                may be referred to it by the Committee;
                (v) exercise such other powers and perform such other
                duties under these rules, or regulations as may be entrusted
                to it by the Government or the Registrar from time to time.
. Powers and duties of the Committee. - The
                Committee shall-
                (i) exercise overall control and supervision over the
                members of the Service;
                (ii) to (vii) *** ***
                              xx xx xx
                15. Appointing Authority. - Appointing authority of and
                the authority exercising disciplinary control over, the
                members of the service and the Management Trainees and
                the Executives shall be such as may be laid down in the
                regulations:
                         Provided that till enforcement of such regulations the
                Chairman of the Committee shall be the appointing authority
                and the authority exercising disciplinary control over them."

12. Later, Regulation 106 was inserted in the Service Regulations vide

                                                                                                     10 Notification No. 2295 dated 9.12.2002. The provision reads as
        under:
                "1. Short title, commencement and application - (1) These
                regulations may be called the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative
                Societies Employees' Service (Tenth Amendment)
                Regulations, 2002.
                (2) They shall take effect from the date of their publication
                in the U.P. Gazette.
                (3) They shall apply to all the Employees of Co-operative
                Societies in Uttar Pradesh.
                2. Insertion of new Regulation. - In the Uttar Pradesh Co-
                operative Societies Employees' Service Regulations, 1975
                after Regulation 105 the following regulation shall be
                 inserted, namely:-
                      "106. The State Government or the Registrar may
                      pass such orders not inconsistent with these
                      Regulations as it or he deems necessary just and
                      proper to remove any difficulty arising in relation to
                      emoluments, terms and conditions of service,
                      appointment or re-appointment, termination,
                      dismissal or removal, deputation or merger."

13. The Cadre Authority was required to frame regulations in terms of
        Rule 9 of the Dairy Service Rules with the prior approval of the
        State Government relating to recruitment, training, emoluments,
        disciplinary control and other conditions of service of the members;
        whereas, the Administrative Committee under Rule 10 was to
        exercise overall control and supervision over the members of the
        service. Rule 15 of the Dairy Service Rules contemplated that the
        Appointing Authority and the authority exercising disciplinary
        control over the members of the service shall be such as may be
        laid down in the regulations. However, the proviso contemplated

        that till the enforcement of such regulations, the Chairman of the
        Administrative Committee shall be the Appointing Authority and
        would act as the authority exercising disciplinary control as well.

14. The Administrative Committee in exercise of the powers conferred
        under Rule 10 read with proviso to Rule 15 passed an office order
        on 8.8.2016 that prior to imposing of penalty, the approval of Dairy
        Milk Commissioner/Registrar would be mandatory. The relevant
        extract from the said Circular reads as under:
                "... Therefore, in the matter of employees of Centralised
                Service Cadre, until the provisions of Uttar Pradesh
                Cooperative Society Employees Service Rules, 1975 are
                applicable, till then prior to imposing of penalty the approval
                of Dairy Milk Commissioner/Registrar is mandatory.
                Therefore, the Chairman, Administrative Committee, Uttar
                Pradesh Cooperative Dairy Federation and Dairy Milk
                Federation Centralised Service Cadre, PCDF Hqrs., Lucknow
                is hereby directed that prior to imposing penalty against the
                members of aforesaid cadre the prior approval of Dairy Milk
                Commissioner/Registrar under the provisions of Regulation
                87 of Uttar Pradesh Cooperative Society Employees Service
                Rules, 1975 may be obtained necessarily."

15. It is in terms of the said Circular that the order of punishment was
        passed against the employee after approval from the
        Commissioner (Dairy Milk), discharging functions as the Registrar.

16. The High Court relied upon a judgment of Division Bench of the
        High Court in Chandra Pal Singh v. State of U.P. & Ors.7

        wherein it was held that prior approval of the Board was not
        obtained as is required under Regulation 87 of the Service

7 Writ-A No. 45263 of 2011 passed on 9.1.2018

Regulations. It was noted that though in terms of notification dated
17.11.1979 Service Regulations ceased to apply, but provisions as
were existing before the provisions of Service Regulations, would
be applicable to the employees of the Centralised Services in terms
of the resolution dated 20.9.1984. It was also held that the
notification dated 17.11.1979 was not mentioned in the resolution
dated 20.9.1984. Thus, it was concluded that the order of
punishment without approval of the Board was not legal in terms of
Regulation 87 of the Service Regulations. Hence, the order of
punishment was quashed. The relevant extract from Chandra Pal
Singh reads as under:

        "Considered the submissions of learned counsel for the
        parties and perused the record. As far as the approval part is
        concerned, admittedly, no approval/concurrence was
        obtained by the Board before passing the order of dismissal
        from service. In view of the provision of Regulation 87 of U.P.
        Cooperative Societies Employees Service Regulation 1975,
        concurrence of the Board is required before passing the
        order of dismissal. According to notification dated
        17.11.1979, Pradeshik Cooperative Dairy Federation Ltd.
        including the Primary Milk Cooperative Society were put out
        of purview of U.P. Cooperative Societies Employees Service
        Regulation 1975 with respect to the recruitment, training
        and disciplinary control and by the same notification,
        selection committee was constituted for category 1 and 2
        employees of cooperative dairy federation. Hence, in case of
        the Centralised Services, the provision of Regulation 87
        ceased to apply and whatever provision was applicable
        before the provision of Regulation 1975 was adopted, which
        will be applicable to the employees of Centralised Services.
        When the provision was adopted by the resolution of the
        Board dated 20.9.1984, the notification of 1979 was not
        mentioned in the same and the resolution regarding
        adoption of the provisions of Pradeshik Cooperative Society
        Employees Service Regulation 1979 were adopted till
        regulation for the Centralised Services was framed.
        Subsequently, it was clarified and approved vide order dated

                31.1.2000 by the Dairy Commissioner/Registrar and the
                resolution dated 20.9.1984 was approved. Hence, till
                regulations are framed, the provisions of U.P. Cooperative
                Societies Employees Service Regulations 1975 are
                applicable."

17. We find that the High Court in the impugned judgment and in
         Chandra Pal Singhproceeded on wrong assumptions of facts and
        law. Factually, in the present appeal, the disciplinary proceedings
        against the employee were initiated on 21.4.2015. The Inquiry
        Report was submitted on 13.6.2018 wherein the charges nos. 1 and
        3 were found to be proved. Thus, there was no question of
        recording of any disagreement with the findings recorded by the
        Inquiry Officer. A show cause notice was subsequently served upon
        the employee enclosing a copy of the Inquiry Report on 25.6.2018.
        The employee was given an opportunity for personal hearing as
        well. Thereafter, an order of punishment was passed after obtaining
        approval from the Commissioner (Dairy Milk).

18. Section 122 of the Act and Rule 389-A of the 1968 Rules empower
        the State Government to constitute an authority for recruitment,
        training and disciplinary control of the employees of Co-operative
        Societies. By virtue of notification dated 4.3.1972, Uttar Pradesh
        Co-operative Institutional Service Board was constituted for the
        purpose of recruiting, training and exercising disciplinary control of
        the employees of Apex Level Societies, Central or Primary Soci-
        eties. Later, Regulation 87 of the Service Regulations mandated
        that no order of punishment could be passed without prior concur-

        rence of the Board. However, by notification dated 17.11.1979 is-
        sued again in terms of the powers conferred on the State Govern-
        ment under Section 122 of the Act and Rule 389-A of the 1968
        Rules, the Apex Level Society i.e. Pradeshik Co-operative Dairy
        Federation, Central or Primary Milk Societies, whose area of opera-
        tion extends to more than one district or State and Co-operative
        Milk Unions, including Kanpur Co-operative Milk Board, were taken
        out of the control of Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Institutional Ser-
        vice Board. A Selection Committee was constituted in respect of
        Category I and II employees. Thereafter, it was the Selection Com-
        mittee who was empowered for the purpose of recruitment, train-
        ing and disciplinary control of the employees of Dairy Co-operative
        Societies until the Dairy Service Rules came into force upon publi-
        cation of the Gazette on 29.8.1984 and not the Service Regulations
        since it ceased to apply vide notification 17.11.1979 issued by the
        State. The Resolution dated 20.09.1984 by the Cadre Authority
        which provided that the service conditions of the members of the
        Centralised Service shall be governed by the 1975 Regulations will
        not revive the applicability of Regulation 87 of the Service
        Regulations as Rule 15 of the Dairy Service Rules contemplate the
        Appointing and Disciplinary Authority.

19. The Administrative Committee exercises overall control and super-
        vision over the members of the Service in terms of Rule 10(i) of the
        Dairy Service Rules. Such Administrative Committee constituted
        under Rule 5 of the Dairy Service Rules is the Appointing Authority

        till the time Regulations are framed in terms of Rule 15 of the said
        Rules. Therefore, the Resolution dated 20.9.1984 will not deter-
        mine the Appointing or Disciplinary Authority, the same being cov-
        ered the Statutory Rule namely the Dairy Service Rules.
20. The Dairy Service Rules have been framed in exercise of the juris-
        diction conferred under Section 122A of the Act. The Regulations
        can be framed by the Registrar or the State either under Section
        121 or 122 of the Act or in terms of Rule 9 of the Dairy Service
        Rules. Such Rules would have precedence over the Regulations,
        which are framed or are required to be framed either by the Regis-
        trar or by the Authority entrusted with the task of recruitment,
        training and disciplinary control. Therefore, in terms of proviso to
        Rule 15, the Chairman of the Administrative Committee is the Ap-
        pointing and Disciplinary Authority. Hence, the Service Regulations
        would be inapplicable to determine the Appointing Authority and/or
        the Disciplinary Authority in respect of the employees of Co-opera-
        tive Milk Societies.

21. The attention of the Division Bench in Chandra Pal Singhwas not
        drawn to Rule 15 of the Dairy Service Rules. The proviso to the
        said Rule empowered the Administrative Committee constituted
        under Rule 5 as an Appointing Authority and the authority to
        exercise disciplinary control over the employees of the centralised
        services till the time regulations are framed. The resolution dated
        20.9.1984 would thus be applicable in respect of other service
        conditions. However, with regard to disciplinary control, it would be

        the Dairy Service Rules which would be applicable.

22. Regulation 106 of the Service Regulations empowers the State
        Government or the Registrar to pass such orders not inconsistent
        with the Regulations in respect of termination, dismissal or
        removal. The punishment imposed is of reversion and not of either
        termination, dismissal or removal. Therefore, Regulation 106 will
        not be applicable. There is also no inconsistency or difficulty which
        the State Government or Registrar is empowered to remove in
        exercise of powers conferred under Regulation 106.

23. In Chandra Pal Singh, the finding of the Division Bench that the
        1979 notification is not mentioned in the resolution of the Cadre
        Authority passed on 20.9.1984 is untenable in view of statutory
        rules contemplating the Appointing Authority. Therefore, the order
        of punishment passed by the Chairman of the Administrative
        Committee in terms of proviso to Rule 15 is by the competent
        Disciplinary Authority.

24. The Administrative Committee however passed an office order on
        8.8.2016 that the Chairman shall seek prior approval of Dairy Milk
        Commissioner/Registrar prior to imposing penalty. Such decision of
        the Administrative Committee is self-regulatory and has been ap-
        plied by the Administrative Committee in the present case as well
        while seeking prior approval of the Milk Commissioner/Registrar.

25. As mentioned before, the 1975 Regulations were framed in

        exercise of power conferred under Section 122 of the 1965 Act. Till
        the time 1975 Regulations were framed, the entire statutory
        regime, in terms of which service conditions including disciplinary
        control of employees in a co-operative society or class of co-
        operative societies could be regulated, was in terms of Sections
        121 and 122 of the 1965 Act. Regulation 87 of 1975 Regulations,
        therefore, has to be seen as part of such general statutory regime.
26. On 16.04.1976, Section 122-A was inserted in the 1965 Act which
        now provided for centralization of services. This Section opens
        with a non-obstante clause and thus, the intent is to give an
        overriding effect over the general regime contemplated by
        Sections 121 and 122 of the 1965 Act. Section 122-A of the 1965
        Act empowers the Government, by rules, to provide for creation of
        one or more services of employees of such co-operative society or
        class of co-operative societies as the Government may think fit and
        prescribe inter aliaconditions of service including appointment and
        removal of persons appointed to such service.
27. It was in exercise of power conferred under Section 122-A of the
        1965 Act that 1984 Rules were framed. Rule 15 of the 1984 Rules
        stipulates that the appointing authority and the authority
        exercising disciplinary control over the members of the service
        shall be such as may be laid down in the Regulations and till such
        Regulations are brought in force, ' the Chairman of the Committee
         shall be the appointing authority and the authority exercising
         disciplinary control over them'.
28. In terms of the specific statutory regime referable to Section 122-A

        of the 1965 Act, Rule 15 thus, would be the governing principle
        rather than Regulation 87 framed in exercise of regulation making
        power referable to the general dispensation under Sections 121
        and 122 of the 1965 Act. Rule 15 does not contemplate that the
        Chairman of the Committee is required to have any prior
        concurrence of any authority.
29. It would, therefore, be incorrect to rely upon or import the
        principles of Rule 87 in substitution of clear intent and mandate of
        Rule 15 of 1984 Rules.
30. The Resolution dated 20.09.1984 or for that matter the Office
        Order dated 08.08.2016 which are pure departmental executive
        instructions cannot displace statutory Rule 15 and the process
        contemplated therein and import a requirement which would be in
        the teeth of Rule 15.
31. The learned Single Bench found that the Chairman of the Adminis-
        trative Committee and that the Milk Commissioner are one and the
        same person, which vitiates the order of punishment passed. We
        do not find any merit in the said finding. Sir William Wade in
        his Administrative Lawstated:
                "But there are many cases where no substitution is possible,
                since no one else is empowered to act. Natural justice then
                has to give way to necessity; for otherwise there is no
                means of deciding and the machinery of justice or
                administration will break down.
                It was further stated:
                "In administrative cases the same exigency may arise.
                Where the statute empowers a particular minister or official
                to act, he will usually be the one and only person who can
                do so. There is then no way of escaping the responsibility,

                even if he is personally interested. Transfer of responsibility
                is, indeed, a recognised type of ultra vires. In one case it
                was unsuccessfully argued that the only minister competent
                to confirm a compulsory purchase order for land for an
                airport had disqualified himself by showing bias and that the
                local authority could only apply for a local Act of
                Parliament."

32. The Milk Commissioner has been appointed as Registrar in exercise
        of the powers conferred on the State Government by the Act. The
        approval from the Registrar is in terms of the resolution of the
        Administrative Committee constituted in terms of Dairy Service
        Rules. The exercise of the powers under the Act are conferred by
        designation. The prior approval of the punishment is by the
        Registrar. If, incidentally, the person holding the post of Registrar
        is also Chairman of the Administrative Committee, it cannot be said
        to be illegal as he is exercising the powers of Registrar as well as of
        the Chairman of the Administrative Committee in terms of the Act
        or the Rules.

33. The Chairman is the Disciplinary Authority in terms of proviso to
        Rule 15 of the Dairy Service Rules. Though, the Administrative
        Committee has resolved that the approval of the Dairy Milk
        Commissioner/Registrar would be mandatory, but such Resolution
        has to be read in the context of proviso to Rule 15 which confers
        jurisdiction on the Chairman of the Administrative Committee to be
        a Disciplinary Authority. Since the Chairman of the Administrative
        Committee happens to be the Registrar, the decision to impose
        punishment may not require prior approval. However, if the prior

        approval has been sought from the office of Registrar, that will not
        vitiate the proceedings.

34. Viewed thus, the power exercised by the Chairman of the
        Committee in the instant case cannot be subject to Regulation 87.
        Therefore, there is nothing wrong in the exercise of power by the
        Chairman of the Committee in the present case.

35. Thus, we do not find any error in the order of punishment passed
        by the Administrative Committee. We find that the orders passed
        by the High Court are not based upon correct appreciation of law
        and facts. Consequently, the orders are set aside and the writ peti-
        tion is dismissed. The appeal is allowed.

                                                      .............................................J.
                                                                       (UDAY UMESH LALIT)

                                                      .............................................J.
                                                                            (HEMANT GUPTA)

                                                      .............................................J.
                                                                       (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)

NEW DELHI;
MARCH 23, 2021.


