Legislation : (b) For writ of mandamus directing the Union of India and all States and Union Territories to provide Hot Cooked Meals, Take Home Rations in consonance to the provisions of the National Food Security Act, 2013 as well as The Supplementary Nutrition (under the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme)Rules, 2020 as well as make provisions for additional Supplementary Nutrition provisions to all beneficiaries of the ICDS Scheme in the form of a comprehensive package of Cooked Food, Eggs, Fruits, dry rations including cereals, pulses, etc.

Statute : 3. The Parliament enacted the National Food Security Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the "Act, 2013") to provide for food and nutritional security in human life cycle approach, by ensuring access to adequate quantity of quality food at affordable prices to people to live a life with dignity and for matters connected therewith. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act apart from containing various other objects, proposed to provide following also in paragraph 4(c), (d) and (e):

Statute : 4. The Act, 2013 by Section 4 creates a statutory right of every pregnant woman and lactating mother free meals during pregnancy and six months after the child birth. Section 5 provides for nutritional support to children, in the case of children in the age group of six months to six years, age appropriate meal, free of charge, through the local Anganwadi so as to meet the nutritional standards. Similarly, Section 6 provides for and management of child malnutrition. Sections 4,5 and 6 are as follows:

Statute : 8. Under Section 7 of the Act, 2013 it is the obligation of the State Governments to implement schemes covering entitlements under Sections 4,5 and 6 of the Act, 2013 in accordance with the guidelines, including cost sharing, between the Central Government and the State Governments in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. The Schedule II of the Act, 2013 provides for nutritional standards. Schedule II of the Act, 2013 is as follows:

Statute : 9. The lockdowns which were placed in the entire country in exercise of the power under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 were lifted by the competent authority in phased manner and gradually specified activities were permitted to be opened.

Statute : 19. The Centre as well as States are statutorily obliged to implement statutory obligation as imposed under Sections 4,5 and 6 of the Act, 2013. The nutritional support is required to be of the nutritional standards which have already been laid down to Schedule II of the Act, 2013 and all States/UTs are obliged to implement such Scheme and have to comply with Schedule II. The main emphasis in the writ petition being the issue of opening of Anganwadi Centres throughout the country, we need to first consider the above issue. Provision of foodgrains as per the provisions of the National Food Security Act, 2013 is a statutory obligation on the State. Article 47 of the Constitution provides that one of the primary duties of the State is to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living of the people.

Statute : 20. After issuance of Order dated 24.03.2020 by Ministry of Home Affairs, for containment of Covid-19, Anganwadi Centres in States/Union Territories were closed. The Government of India, Ministry of Women and Child Development vide letter dated 30.03.2020 directed issuance of necessary instructions to the District Authorities to utilize services of Anganwadi workers/helpers for providing supplementary nutrition to the beneficiaries at their doorsteps. After taking suitable measures as suggested by Health Authorities, Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs issued an order dated 15.04.2020 in exercise of powers under Section 10(2)(l) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, wherein in paragraph 8, it was provided that Anganwadis shall remain functional by distributing the food items and nutrition once in fifteen days at the doorsteps of the beneficiaries i.e. Children, pregnant women and lactating mothers. The order further stated the beneficiaries shall not attend the Anganwadi.

Statute : 31. The State of Bihar for a few months has not supplied Take Home Rations rather it has directed for crediting the amount equivalent to Take Home Ration to the Bank Account of the beneficiaries or their parents. The State of Bihar, however, has started distributing cereals as Home Take Rations by orders issued by the State of Bihar in April, 2020. The State of Gujarat in its affidavit has stated that it is providing to Children (below 6 years of Age), 8 packets of Balshakti (500gm Packets) Take Home Ration per month to match up nutritional requirements. Take Home Ration is being distributed through the medium of Gujarat Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation. It further states that since June 2020, the ready to eat nutritional traditional sweet (Sukhadi) 1-Kilogram per week in lieu of hot cooked meals is provided to 3 to 6 years' children. We are of the view that the State ought to have included certain cereals in Take Home Ration instead of providing only 'Balshakti' and 'Sukhadi'. The nutritional standard as provided in Schedule II of Act, 2013, has to be met by all States and Union Territories.

Statute : 32. There is no doubt that the Central Government as well as all the States and Union Territories have issued necessary guidelines for implementing statutory requirements of Act, 2013 and for meeting the nutritional standards. The big question however is as to what extent the implementation is on the ground and the benefits are extended to beneficiaries as required by the Statute. The beneficiaries which belong to vulnerable class are not equipped with suitable mechanisms to raise issues of non-implementation and not providing food articles complying with nutritional standards as provided in the Statute.

Statute : (IV) All States/Union Territories shall ensure that nutritional standards as provided in Schedule II of National Food Security Act, 2013, reproduced herein above in para 13 is fulfilled by providing nutritional support to pregnant women, lactating mothers, nutritional support to children who suffer from malnutrition.

