Statute : 1. The petitioners have approached this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. They call in question Sections 3, 4 and 10 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act 2020 (hereinafter referred to as 'the impugned amendments', for short). Section 3 of the impugned amendment, amends Section 7(1) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Code', for short). Section 4 of the impugned amendment, incorporates an additional Explanation in Section 11 of the Code. Section 10 of the impugned amendment inserts Section 32A in the Code.

Legislation : Provided also that where an application for initiating the corporate insolvency resolution process against a corporate debtor has been filed by a financial creditor referred to in the first and second provisos and has not been admitted by the Adjudicating Authority before the commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2020, such application shall be modified to comply with the requirements of the first or second proviso within thirty days of the commencement of the said Act, failing which the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn before its admission."

Legislation : Provided further that every person who was a "designated partner" as defined in clause (j) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, or an "officer who is in default", as defined in clause (60) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, or was in any manner incharge of, or responsible to the corporate debtor for the conduct of its business or associated with the corporate debtor in any manner and who was directly or indirectly involved in the commission of such offence as per the report submitted or complaint filed by the investigating authority, shall continue to be liable to be prosecuted and punished for such an offence committed by the corporate debtor notwithstanding that the corporate debtor's liability has ceased under this sub-section.

Legislation : "3(7). "corporate person" means a company as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, a limited liability partnership, as defined in clause (n) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, or any other person incorporated with limited liability under any law for the time being in force but shall not include any financial service provider."

Statute : 12. Part III deals with insolvency resolution and bankruptcy code for individuals and partnership firms. It may be noticed at once that partnership firms with limited liability as defined in the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 fall within the definition of the word 'Corporate person' and insolvency and liquidation process in regard to the same is found in Part II of the Code. It is in regard to Insolvency resolution and bankruptcy for the other partnership firms which one has to look to the provisions of Part III. Part III begins with Section 78 and ends with Section 187. The further provisions relate to the regulation of insolvency professional agencies and information utilities. They are all key instrumentalities for the effective working of the Code. Equally, it may be apposite to bear in mind Section 238A. It reads as follows:

Legislation : "238A. Limitation - The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) shall, as far as may be, apply to the proceedings or appeals before the Adjudicating Authority, the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, the Debt Recovery Tribunal or the Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be."

Statute : 15. In regard to the comparison sought to be made, with similar requirements in Sections 397, 398 read with 399 of the Companies Act, 1956 and Section 241 and 244 of the Companies Act, 2013, he would submit that there are significant distinctions.

Statute : 17. Secondly, he would submit that having regard to the explanation in Section 244 of the companies Act, 2013, it brings about clarity in regard to the situation where there is a joint holding. The absence of any such similar provision in Section 7 of the Code is emphasised in an attempt at persuading the court to overturn the law. He would further point out the practical difficulties in the working of the amended law. He submits that the date of default of various home buyers may be different. Therefore, to forge a common complaint impelling a group of home buyers to come together is impracticable and not workable'. He would submit that legislature cannot be permitted to take away through one hand what it has given by the other.

Statute : 42. Placing reliance on judgment of this Court, in Garikapati Veeraya(supra), it is contended that even a vested right can be taken away by the Legislature, if a subsequent enactment so expressly provides or if it so by necessary implication. A minimum threshold requirement is a common feature of class action litigation. There are several legislations which provide for a minimum threshold in order to initiate class action. Section 245 of the Companies Act, 2013 and 241 of the said Act are relied upon. Sections 397 and 398 of the Companies Act, 1956, read with Section 399, contemplated a minimum threshold requirement for seeking relief under Sections 397 and 398. Reference is placed on the Bhabha Committee Report (Company Law Committee) in 1952. So also, is support, sought to be drawn from the judgment of this Court in J.P. Srivastava & Sons (P) Ltd. and others v. Gwalior Sugar Co. Ltd. and others (2005) 1 SCC 172. Under the Consumer Protection Act, this Court, rendered the judgment in Anjum Hussain and others v. Intellicity Business Park Private Limited and others (2019) 6 SCC 519. A minimum threshold adds, authenticity and weightage to the claim in a class action, proving it to be a common grievance and not a mere obstruction in the work of the opposite party. Reference is made to Rule 23 of Federal Rules of Civil Procedure in the United States, which provide for class action suits. The said Rules contemplate numerosity, commonality, typicality and adequacy of representation. It is pointed out that joint filing was not only not alien to Section 7 but it was interwoven into its very DNA. Even as originally enacted, Section 7 contemplated joint filing by financial creditors. Uniqueness of the Code lies in the fact that the financial creditors may file an application based on a default that occurred in respect of the third-party financial creditor, who may choose not to file an application itself. At the triggering stage, an application under Section 7 partakes the character of an application in rem proceeding rather than in personam one. The impugned amendment merely extends the same rationale.

Statute : 44. As far as absence of information, so far as debenture holders are concerned, necessary information regarding them is available in the public domain, under Section 88(1)(b) and Section 88(1)(c) of the Companies Act, 2013, which obliges every company to maintain a register of its debenture holders and security holders. A penalty for non-compliance is contemplated under Section 88(5). Section 95 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides that registers, required to be maintained by the Company under Section 88, shall be kept in the registered office. Without payment of fees, the register is open to inspection by any member, debenture holder or other security holder. Extracts and copies of such registered can be obtained. Reference is also made to Rule 4 of the Companies (Management and Administration) Rules, 2014, which contemplates a separate register in Form - FMG-II for debenture holders. It contains all details of the debenture holder, including the e-mail id, address, etc.. Thus, there is a reservoir of information available for complying with the requirement under the first proviso.

Legislation : (c) any action to foreclose, recover or enforce any security interest created by the corporate debtor in respect of its property including any action under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002); (d) the recovery of any property by an owner or lessor where such property is occupied by or in the possession of the corporate debtor.

Statute : THE REAL ESTATE (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 2016 AND ITS SCHEME (HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS 'RERA', FOR SHORT).

Statute : 81. The Real Estate Regulation and Development Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha in 2013. Noticing the fact that though the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is available as a Forum in the real estate market for the buyers, the recourse is only curative and is not adequate to address all the concerns of the buyers and promoters in the said sector, it was felt that there should be a central legislation in the interest of effective consumer protection, uniformity and standardization of business practices and transactions in the real estate sector. The Bill was passed by both the Houses of Parliament and received the assent of the President of India on the 25.03.2016. By 01.05.2017, the provisions of the Act came into force, even though, certain Sections have come into force earlier on 01.05.2016.

Legislation : Provided that, where a building constructed, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, on any land contains only two or three apartments, the owner of such building may, by a declaration duly executed and registered under the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), indicate his intention to make the provisions of this Act applicable to such building, and on such declaration being made, such owner shall execute and register a Deed of Apartment in accordance with the provisions of this Act, as if such owner were the promoter in relation to such building."

Statute : 113. For appreciating the meaning of the word 'allottee', for the purpose of the Code, undoubtedly, it is necessary to travel to Section 2(d) and 2(zn) of RERA for the reason that in Section 5(8)(f) of the Code, the following Explanation was inserted by Act 26 of 2018 w.e.f. 06.06.2018. This provision has been upheld by this Court in Pioneer (supra).

Statute : 124. The further contention that 10 percent is dynamic and what is 1/10 in the morning may fall short by night if more allotment is made, is untenable in law. The provisions of the Companies Act, 1913 (Section 153-C), Section 399 of the Companies Act, 1956 and Section 244 of the Companies Act, 2013 contain similar provisions. The mere difficulties in given cases, to comply with a law can hardly furnish a ground to strike it down. As to what would constitute the real estate project, it must depend on the terms & conditions and scope of a particular real estate project in which allottees are a part of. These are factual matters to be considered in the facts of each case.

Statute : 132. It is true that Section 238A (inserted with effect from 06.06.2018) of the Code provides that the provisions of the Limitation Act shall be applicable as far as may be to the proceedings or appeals before the Adjudicating Authority and the NCLAT, as the case may be, inter alia. Interpreting this provision, inter alia, this Court in B.K. Educational Services Private Limited (supra), has held that Article 137 in Schedule I of the Limitation Act, 1963, will apply in regard to an application under Sections 7 and 9 of the Code. This Court held, inter alia, as follows:

Statute : 133. In fact, the Court, in the said case, in the course of its judgment, gives an example of a debt which is due since 1990 and which has become barred but which is sought to be revived through the medium of Section 7 of the Code which law came into being in 2016. It is to avoid such situations that this Court noted that even if Section 238A was inserted after the original enactment, the Limitation Act, 1963, would, indeed apply, right from the inception of the Code. It is to be noticed that this Court has applied Article 137, and also, at the same time, countenanced the applicability of Section 5 of the Limitation Act, providing for condonation of delay in appropriate cases.

Statute : 141. The question, then arises, as to the alleged lack of clarity about the point of time, at which the requirements of the impugned provisos, are to be met. Is it sufficient, if the required number of allottees join together and file an application under Section 7 and fulfil the requirements, at the time of presentation? Or, is it necessary that the application must conform the numerical strength, under the new proviso, even after filing of the application, and till the date, the application is admitted under Section 7(5)? There can be no doubt that the requirement of a threshold under the impugned proviso, in Section 7(1), must be fulfilled as on the date of the filing of the application. In this regard, we find support from an early judgment of this Court, which was rendered under Section 153-C of the Companies Act, 1913. Section 153-C is the predecessor to Sections 397 and 398 read with Section 399 of the Companies Act, 1956. Its most recent avatar is contained in Sections 241 and 242 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with Section 244. In fact, Section 399 (3) of the Companies Act, 1956, read as follows:

Statute : 142. In the decision of this Court in Rajahmundry Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. v. A. Nageshwara Rao and others AIR 1956 SC 213, the provision in question, viz., Section 153-C of Companies Act, 1913 dealt with the power of the Court to Act, when the Company acts in a prejudicial manner or oppresses any part of its members. It, inter alia, provided that no application could be made by any member, in the case of a company having a share capital unless the member has obtained consent, in writing, of not less than one hundred in number of the members of the company or not less than one-tenth in number of the members, whichever is less. There was also an alternate requirement, to which, resort could be made in regard to company, not having share capital. There was another mode of fulfilling the threshold requirement. In the facts of the said case, the number of the members of the company were 603. Sixty-five members consented to the application. The problem, however, arose as it was contended that 13 of the members who had consented, had, subsequent to the presentation of the application, withdrawn their consent. This Court went on to hold as follows:

Statute : 144. One of the contentions, which is raised is that in Section 399 (2) of the Companies Act, 1956, it was provided that in applying the threshold test of requisite number of members, to join in an application under Sections 397 and 398, where any share or shares are held by two or more persons, they shall be counted only as one member. Section 244 of the Companies Act, 2013, corresponds to Section 399 of the Companies Act, 1956. The Explanation in Section 241(1) contains an identical provision as in Section 399(2). It is, however, pointed out by the petitioners that in the matter of an allotment, being made to more than one person, of an apartment or other real estate property, it is not laid down as to how the matter is to be dealt with. It is vague. It is arbitrary. It is true that in the impugned proviso, introduced in Section 7(1), there is no indication as to how the number of allottees are to be reckoned in the case of more than one person. It will be of interest to note that in Section 14 of the RERA, the Promoter is forbidden from making any additions and alterations in the sanctioned plans, layout plans and specifications, the nature of the fixtures, fittings and amenities, which are agreed to be undertaken, without the consent of that person. Of course, minor additions or alterations, in circumstances provided in the proviso, can be carried out.

Statute : 147. As far as the situation projected about, there being no clarity regarding whether, if there is a joint allotment of an apartment to more than one person, is it to be taken as only one allottee or as many allottees as there are joint allottees, it would appear to us, on a proper understanding of the definition of the word 'allottee' in Section 2(d) and the object, for which the requirement of hundred allottees or one-tenth has been put, and also, not being oblivious to Section 399(2) of the Companies Act, 1956, as also the Explanation in Section 244(1) of the Companies Act, 2013, in the case of a joint allotment of an apartment, plot or a building to more than one person, the allotment can only be treated as a single allotment. This for the reason that the object of the Statute, admittedly, is to ensure that there is a critical mass of persons (allottees), who agree that the time is ripe to invoke the Code and to submit to the inexorable processes under the Code, with all its attendant perils. The object of maintaining speed in the CIRP and also the balancing of interest of all the stakeholders, would be promoted by the view that as in the case of the Companies Acts, 1956 and 2013, that for the purpose of complying with the impugned provisos in Section 7(1), while the allottee can be of any of the categories, fulfilling the description of an allottee in Section 2(d) of RERA, as interpreted earlier by us joint allottees of a single apartment, will be treated as only one allottee. Any other view can lead to clear abuse and defeating of the object of the Code. If, for instance, a single apartment is taken in the name of hundred persons, a single allottee, who in turn comprise of relatives or family members or friends, can move an application, even though the position ante would be restored, which means that only the allottee qua one apartment, plot or building, is before the Authority and it would not really represent a critical mass of the allottees in the real estate project concerned. Therefore, we have no hesitation in rejecting the contentions of the petitioner on having made the said interpretation.

Statute : 148. There is another argument, which is pressed before us as one, which distinguishes the impugned provisions from those contained in the Companies Act. Section 399(4) of the Companies Act, 1956, read as follows:

Statute : A LOOK AT ORDER I RULE 8 OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 (THE CPC) AND SECTION 12 OF THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986 and the contentions based on the same.

Statute : 153. This provision is sought to be contrasted with the provisos inserted by the impugned amendment. It was sought to be contended that the procedure contemplated in Order I Rule 8, on the one hand, countenances the setting in motion of a civil suit by a single person, no doubt with the permission of the Court and after a Notice is given, as provided therein, any of the persons, who have the same interest, can come forward and seek to be made a party. By the device, embedded in Order I Rule 8, the interest of all the persons, who are having the same interests, is best safeguarded. Should he wish to oppose the applicant, he is free to do so. Should he wish to, on the other hand, support the Plaintiff, it is equally open to him to adopt such a course. At the end of the proceedings, when the Decree is passed, it shall be binding on all the persons, for whose benefit or on whose behalf, the suit is laid even by a single person. On the other hand, for reasons, which are entirely arbitrary, it is pointed out that a most cumbersome and unachievable threshold requirement is thrust upon a class of the financial creditors alone, by requiring that should an allottee wish to invoke Section 7 of the Code, he should muster the support of at least 99 other allottees or one-tenth of the total number of allottees, whichever is lower. Again, it is emphasized that matters are made worse by insisting that the allottees must be drawn from the same project. It is, similarly, submitted that the Consumer Protection Act also has embraced the principle of Order I Rule 8 of the CPC, as can be seen from Section 12 of the Consumer Protection Act. The definition of the word 'complainant', in Section 2(b)(iv) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, includes one or more consumer, where there are numerous persons having the same interest. Section 12 provides for the manner in which a complaint is to be made. Section 12(1)(c) reads as follows:

Legislation : "30. As a matter of fact, the Code and RERA operate in completely different spheres. The Code deals with a proceeding in rem in which the focus is the rehabilitation of the corporate debtor. This is to take place by replacing the management of the corporate debtor by means of a resolution plan which must be accepted by 66% of the Committee of Creditors, which is now put at the helm of affairs, in deciding the fate of the corporate debtor. Such resolution plan then puts the same or another management in the saddle, subject to the provisions of the Code, so that the corporate debtor may be pulled out of the woods and may continue as a going concern, thus benefitting all stakeholders involved. It is only as a last resort that winding up of the corporate debtor is resorted to, so that its assets may be liquidated and paid out in the manner provided by Section 53 of the Code. On the other hand, RERA protects the interests of the individual investor in real estate projects by requiring the promoter to strictly adhere to its provisions. The object of RERA is to see that real estate projects come to fruition within the stated period and to see that allottees of such projects are not left in the lurch and are finally able to realise their dream of a home, or be paid compensation if such dream is shattered, or at least get back monies that they had advanced towards the project with interest. At the same time, recalcitrant allottees are not to be tolerated, as they must also perform their part of the bargain, namely, to pay instalments as and when they become due and payable. Given the different spheres within which these two enactments operate, different parallel remedies are given to allottees under RERA to see that their flat/apartment is constructed and delivered to them in time, barring which compensation for the same and/or refund of amounts paid together with interest at the very least comes their way. If, however, the allottee wants that the corporate debtor's management itself be removed and replaced, so that the corporate debtor can be rehabilitated, he may prefer a Section 7 application under the Code. That another parallel remedy is available is recognised by RERA itself in the proviso to Section 71(1), by which an allottee may continue with an application already filed before the Consumer Protection Fora, he being given the choice to withdraw such complaint and file an application before the adjudicating officer under RERA read with Section 88. In similar circumstances, this Court in Swaraj Infrastructure (P) Ltd. v. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. [Swaraj Infrastructure (P) Ltd. v. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd., (2019) 3 SCC 620 : (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 136] has held that the Debts Recovery Tribunal proceedings under the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 and winding-up proceedings under the Companies Act, 1956 can carry on in parallel streams (see paras 21 and 22 therein)."

Statute : 161. The contention on behalf of the petitioner's both in regard to the debenture holders and security holders as also the allottees is that the provisos are unworkable. This is for the reason that information relating to allottees in respect of real estate projects and the debenture holders and security holders in regard to the first proviso is not available. In regard to shareholders with respect to Section 399 of the Companies Act, 1956 and section 244 of the Companies Act 2013, it is pointed out that the threshold requirements can be fulfilled having regard to the documented information regarding the shareholding available in law. This is not the position it is pointed out in regard to the categories covered by provisos one and two. This renders the provisions manifestly arbitrary.

Statute : 164. In regard to the debenture holders and security holders also we would see no merit in the contentions. There is a statutory mechanism, which is comprised in the provisions of the Companies act 2013, namely Section (88). Section 88 (1) reads as follows:

Statute : 178. In the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Subramanian Swami vs. Director, CBI and ors. (2014) 8 SCC 682 the issue was the constitutional validity of Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. Section 6A declared that the CBI shall not conduct any inquiry or investigation into any offence alleged to have been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 except with the previous approval of the Central Government where the allegation was in relation to employees of the Central government of the level of Joint Secretary and above and also officers appointed by the Central Government in public sector corporations controlled by the Central Government. It is dealing with this challenge that this Court went on to hold after refering to the earlier case law including the judgment of this Court in the Special Courts case (supra) that it is well settled that the Courts do not substitute their views as to what the policy is. It held as follows:

Statute : 181. In 1960 1 SCR 39 / AIR 1959 SC 1124, the petitioners challenged the constitutionality of the Sugar Export Promotion Act, 1958 apart from certain orders passed thereunder. The contention taken by the petitioners was that since the declared object of the Act was to earn foreign exchange, compelling only sugar manufacturers which manufactured by vacuum pan process to export sugar was discriminatory. They also pointed out that manufactures of commodities other than sugar were not compelled to export in the same manner and there was further discrimination. It was while repelling this contention that the Court laid down as follows:

Statute : 184. In State of West Bengal and ors. v. Rash Bihari Sarkar and ors. (1993) 1 SCC 479, exemption was granted under Bengal Amusements Act, 1922 as amended in 1981 from Entertainment Tax for theatre groups which were bonafide and which performed not for monetary gain which tax exemption was not given to theatre groups which performed for monetary gains. Both were theatre groups. Noticing however, the distinction between the theatre groups, this Court went on to hold as follows:

Statute : 194. The object of the law is clear. A radical departure was contemplated from the erstwhile regime, which was essentially contained in The Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985, and which manifested a deep malaise, which impacted the economy itself. To put it shortly, the procedures involved under the Act, simply meant procrastination in matters, where speed and dynamic decisions were the crying need of the hour. The value of the assets of the Company in distress, was wasted away both by the inexorable and swift passage of time and tardy rate at which the forums responded to the problem of financial distress. The Code was an imperative need for the nation to try and catch up with the rest of the world, be it in the matter of ease of doing business, elevating the rate of recovery of loans, maximization of the assets of ailing concerns and also, the balancing the interests of all stakeholders. The Code purports to achieve the object of maximization of the assets of corporate bodies, inter alia, which have slipped into insolvency. Present a default, which, no doubt, is not barred by time (subject to the power of the Authority under Section 5 of the Limitation Act), the Insolvency Resolution Process can be triggered. It falls into two stages. In the first stage or the calm period, every attempt is contemplated to rescue the corporate debtor from falling into liquidation. No doubt the moratorium under section 14 is inevitable. The most significant feature of the Code is the seemingly inexorable time limit, which is fixed under Section 12. On the application being admitted under Section 7(5), an Interim Resolution Professional makes his appearance. In him, vests the powers to manage the affairs of the corporate debtor. He may be replaced by a Resolution Professional or he may be appointed as a Resolution Professional. The most striking feature of the Code is the constitution of the Committee of Creditors and the role, which it plays. In short, the show is run by the Resolution Professional, subject to the control of the Committee of Creditors. The Resolution of Insolvency is essentially sought through the instrument of a Resolution Plan to be submitted by a Resolution Applicant. Various restrictions are cast, in regard to a Resolution Applicant, through the device of Section 29A of the Code. A Resolution Plan is intended to resuscitate an ailing corporate debtor and keep it going as a going concern. The importance of rescuing ailing businesses in the form of infusing new life in such concerns, cannot be understated. Its significance lies in various directions. There would be various categories of creditors, of which, the legislative choice appears to show some degree of preference for the financial creditors, particularly in the form of banks and financial institutions. One of the chief goals of the Code is to prevent the loss of the value of capital. If the recovery of the loan is effected at the earliest, it translates into the availability of the recovered capital for being lent to other entrepreneurs, and this is an aspect, which goes to the root of the matter. With every passing hour, not unnaturally, depreciation will claim its victim in the form of diminution of value of the assets. Should insolvency pass into the stage of liquidation, the loss is not only of the concerned businesses, but it also would represent a loss for the Nation. This is, undoubtedly, apart from the impairment of the interests of all stakeholders. The stakeholders would include the financial creditors and the operational creditors, as well. Employees of the failed business, would take a direct hit. Therefore, the Code accords the highest importance to speed in the matter of undergoing the process of insolvency.

Statute : 220. These provisions were unsuccessfully challenged before this Court as evident from the decision in the Pioneer (supra). As pointed out on behalf of the Union, in the said case the challenge was mounted by the promoters of real estate projects. These provisions have been accepted by creditors like the petitioners covered by sub-section 6A. The impact of the insertion of sub-section 3A in Section 25A is to be noticed. As already seen section 25A, inter alia, deals with the exercise of rights and the liabilities of authorised representative of creditors like debenture holders and allottees. After the insertion of sub-section 3A in section 25A, the majority of the creditors of a class is permitted to call the shots. It's view, in other words, will hold sway. This is subject to the Code otherwise. The legislative understanding is clear that in regard to such creditors bearing the hallmark of large numbers they are required to be treated differently. If they are not treated differently it would spell chaos and the objects of the Code would not be fulfilled. It is an extension of this basic principle which has led to the insertion of the impugned proviso. Insisting on a threshold in regard to these categories of creditors would lead to the halt to indiscriminate litigation which would result in an uncontrollable docket explosion as far as the authorities which work the Code are concerned. The debtor who is apparently stressed is relieved of the last straw on the camel's back, as it were, by halting individual creditors whose views are not shared even by a reasonable number of its peers rushing in with applications. Again, as in the case of the allottees, this is not a situation where while treating them as financial creditors they are totally deprived of the right to apply under Section 7 as part of the legislative scheme. The legislative policy reflects an attempt at shielding the corporate debtor from what it considers would be either for frivolous or avoidable applications. What we mean by avoidable applications is a decision which would not be taken by similarly placed creditors keeping in mind the consequences that would ensue not only in regard to persons falling in the same category but also the generality of creditors and other stakeholders. All that the amendment is likely to ensure is that the filing of the application is preceded by a consensus at least by a minuscule percentage of similarly placed creditors that the time has come for undertaking a legal odyssey which is beset with perils for the applicants themselves apart from others. As far as the percentage of applicants contemplated under the proviso it is clear that it cannot be dubbed as an arbitrary or capricious figure. The legislature is not wanting in similar requirements under other laws. The provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 and its predecessors contained similar provisions. Allowing what is described as 'lone Ranger' applications beset with extremely serious ramifications which are at cross purposes with the objects of the code. This is apart from it in particular spelling avoidable doom for the interest of the creditors falling in the same categories. The object of speed in deciding CIRP proceedings would also be achieved by applying the threshold to debenture holders and security holders. The dividing line between wisdom or policy of the legislature and limitation placed by the Constitution must not be overlooked.

Statute : 225. As already noticed, the Amendment Act, 2020 received the assent of the President of India on 13.03.2020 and it is deemed to have come into force on the 28.12.2019 (be it remembered that the Ordinance, inserting the same Explanation, had been brought into force on 28.12.2019).

Statute : 228. It was pointed out that the word 'includes' in Explanation-I to Section 11 would indicate that an Application for CIRP is barred not only against itself but also against any other Corporate Debtor when the applicant-Corporate Debtor is found placed in circumstances expressed in Section 11. It is further contended that the impugned Amendment, effectively repeals Sections 11(a) and 11(d). If the purport of the Explanation, which is impugned, is that the intention of the law was to only bar an Application for CIRP by a Corporate Debtor against itself, then, it will be unworkable and practically impossible. Explanation-II is manifestly arbitrary. Support is sought to be drawn from Shayara Bano (supra). It was further contended that the amendment cannot be used retrospectively and take away the vested right. In fact, it is contended that a clarificatory amendment is prospective but Explanation II is in reality a substantive provision. Attempt is made to lay store by the Judgment of this Court in Virtual Soft Systems Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi-I (2007) 9 SCC 665, wherein this Court was dealing with Section 271 of the Income-Tax Act, 1961, in which, an Explanation was added. The Section in question, was a penal provision.

Statute : 233. It is important to actually understand the scope of an Explanation. We have already noticed the summary of the conclusions of this Court in S. Sundaram Pillai (supra) at paragraph-53. It may give the impression that an Explanation, in those circumstances, does not widen the boundaries of the main provision to which it is an Explanation. However, it is apposite that we hearken back to what this Court said on an earlier occasion. In a judgment rendered by four learned Judges in Hiralal Rattanlal and Ors. v. State of U.P. and Another (1973) 1 SCC 216, this Court had, while considering the scope of an Explanation in a Taxing Statute, viz., the United Provinces Sales Tax Act, 1948, had this to say:

Legislation : "22. It was next urged that on a true construction of Explanation II to Section 3-D, no charge can be said to have been created on the purchases of split or processed pulses. It was firstly contended that an Explanation cannot extend the scope of the main section, it can only explain that section. In construing a statutory provision, the first and the foremost rule of construction is the literary construction. All that we have to see at the very outset is what does that provision say? If the provision is unambiguous and if from that provision, the legislative intent is clear, we need not call into aid the other rules of construction of statutes. The other rules of construction of statutes are called into aid only when the legislative intention is not clear. Ordinarily a proviso to a section is intended to take out a part of the main section for special treatment. It is not expected to enlarge the scope of the main section. But cases have arisen in which this Court has held that despite the fact that a provision is called proviso, it is really a separate provision and the so-called proviso has substantially altered the main section. In CIT v. Bipinchandra Maganlal & Co. Ltd., Bombay [AIR 1961 SC 1040 : (1961) 2 SCR 493 : (1961) 41 ITR 290] this Court held that by the fiction in Section 10(2)(vii) second proviso read with Section 2(6-C) of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 what is really not income is, for the purpose of computation of assessable income, made taxable income.

Statute : 235. In fact, with respect to the decision in S. Sundaram Pillai (supra), it may be necessary to dissect the provisions which fell for consideration. The Court, in the said case, was dealing with the law relating to restrictions on eviction of the tenant prevailing in Tamil Nadu. The substantive provision conferred a right on the landlord to evict a tenant, should he wilfully fail to pay the rent. There was a proviso, however, which empowered the Court to grant time to the tenant subject to the limit of 30 days, should it be found that the non-payment of the rent was not wilful. It was to this proviso that an Explanation was added. The Explanation, in turn, provided that if the landlord gave a notice to the tenant to pay the rent and rent remained unpaid for a period of two months, it would be construed as a case of wilful default. The arguments, which were addressed before this Court, included the contention that even if a notice was given within the meaning of the Explanation, it would not control the duty of the Court to find out whether there was wilful default. It was, while the Court dealt with these arguments, inter alia, that the Court proceeded to lay down two propositions. Firstly, in a case where no notice was given by the landlord, within the meaning of the Explanation, it was for the Court to find out, on the facts and circumstances, as to whether there was wilful default. The second proposition, which was laid down was, even if a notice was given under the Explanation and there was default in payment, it would be treated as a case of wilful default unless the tenant was able to establish that he was prevented from making payment on account of circumstances which prevented him from doing so. We may also notice a still later judgment of this Court in Sonia Bhatia (supra). In the said case, the question fell for consideration under the law relating to land reforms. Sub-Section (6) of Section 5 of the U.P. Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960 provided that the transfer made by a person, after a certain date, was to be ignored. There was a proviso, which, however, excepted certain transfers. One of the conditions to be met before a case could fall within the proviso was that the transfer must have been made for valuable consideration. To the said proviso, there was again an Explanation I followed by Explanation II. It reads as follows:

Statute : 253. The first proviso in sub-Section (1) declares that if there is approval of a Resolution Plan under Section 31 and a prosecution has been instituted during the CIRP against the corporate debtor, the corporate debtor will stand discharged. This is, however, subject to the condition that the requirements in sub-Section (1), which have been elaborated by us, have been fulfilled. In other words, if under the approved Resolution plan, there is a change in the management and control of the corporate debtor, to a person, who is not a promoter, or in the management and control of the corporate debtor, or a related party of the corporate debtor, or the person who acquires control or management of the corporate debtor, has neither abetted nor conspired in the commission of the offence, then, the prosecution, if it is instituted after the commencement of the CIRP and during its pendency, will stand discharged against the corporate debtor. Under the second proviso to sub-Section (1), however, the designated partner in respect of the liability partnership or the Officer in default, as defined under Section 2(60) of the Companies Act, 2013, or every person, who was, in any manner, in-charge or responsible to the corporate debtor for the conduct of its business, will continue to be liable to be prosecuted and punished for the offence committed by the corporate debtor. This is despite the extinguishment of the criminal liability of the corporate debtor under sub-Section (1). Still further, every person, who was associated with the corporate debtor in any manner, and, who was directly or indirectly involved in the commission of such offence, in terms of the Report submitted and Report filed by the Investigating Authority, will continue to be liable to be prosecuted and punished for the offence committed by the corporate debtor. Thus, the combined reading of the various limbs of sub-Section (1) would show that while, on the one hand, the corporate debtor is freed from the liability for any offence committed before the commencement of the CIRP, the statutory immunity from the consequences of the commission of the offence by the corporate debtor is not available and the criminal liability will continue to haunt the persons, who were in in-charge of the assets of the corporate debtor, or who were responsible for the conduct of its business or those who were associated with the corporate debtor in any manner, and who were directly or indirectly involved in the commission of the offence, and they will continue to be liable.

Statute : 256. The contentions of the petitioners appear to be that this provision is constitutionally anathema as it confers an undeserved immunity for the property which would be acquired with the proceeds of a crime. The provisions of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 (for short, the PMLA) are pressed before us. It is contended that the prohibition against proceeding against the property, affects the interest of stakeholders like the petitioners who may be allottees or other creditors. In short, it appears to be their contention that the provisions cannot stand the scrutiny of the Court when tested on the anvil of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The provision is projected as being manifestly arbitrary. To screen valuable properties from being proceeded against, result in the gravest prejudice to the home buyers and other creditors. The stand of the Union of India is clear. The provision is born out of experience. The Code was enacted in the year 2016. In the course of its working, the experience it has produced, is that, resolution applicants are reticent in putting up a Resolution Plan, and even if it is forthcoming, it is not fair to the interest of the corporate debtor and the other stake holders.

Legislation : Provided also that where an application for initiating the corporate insolvency resolution process against a corporate debtor has been filed by a financial creditor referred to in the first and second provisos and has not been admitted by the Adjudicating Authority before the commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2020, such application shall be modified to comply with the requirements of the first or second proviso within thirty days of the commencement of the said Act, failing which the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn before its admission."

Statute : 273. It is apposite to notice the context in which the said observations were made. There was an ex parte decree passed by a Court in West-Bengal in 1949. It was transferred to a Court (Morena) in Old Madhya Bharat State. The Execution Petition was dismissed on the ground that it was an ex parte Decree by a foreign court. This Court noted that Sections 38 and 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure did not apply on the day in question, and therefore, the transfer orders was without jurisdiction. On 1st April, 1951 the CPC was extended to former state of Madhya Bharat. The decree holders sought a fresh transfer of the decree to the very same court as earlier namely Morena which had judgment debtor that the decree could not be executed as being of the foreign court. This Court reversed the High Court judgment. The argument which was raised, was based on Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1951, by which the Code was extended to Madhya Bharat. There was a repeal of the law that prevailed in the State when the amendment to the CPC in 1951 was made applicable. There was, however, also a proviso which saved rights privileges, obligations and liabilities acquired, accrued or incurred. The contention therefore of the judgment debtor was that the judgment debtor's right to resist was preserved under the saving clause. It was found by this Court that the provisions of CPC enforced in Madhya Bharat did not confer the right claimed by the judgment debtor. All that happened as a result of the extension of the Code to the whole of India in 1951, was that the decrees which could have been executed in the British India could now be executed in the whole of India. It is, therefore, in the context of a repeal and as to whether right to take advantage of the repealed law constituted a right accrued under the usual saving clause that the observations made in paragraph 16 are to be understood.

Statute : The appellant effected a conditional purchase under Section 22 of the Crown Lands Alienation Act, 1861, adjoining the land which he had acquired in fee simple. He made certain applications, seeking to make further additional conditional purchases of certain adjoining lands as also seeking a lease. The questions which arose for the opinion of the court were three in number. Firstly, the question arose whether the conditional purchase which the appellant had made, constituted him the holder of an original conditional purchase, under Section 42 of the Act of 1884. Still further, the question fell for decision as to whether Section 22 of the Crown Lands Act of 1884 reserved the right for the appellant the right to purchase additional conditional purchases of adjoining crown lands, which were allowed to the full area of 648 acres allowed by the repealed Act. Thirdly, the question arose, as to whether supposing him to be entitled to the additional conditional purchase, was he entitled to the conditional lease which he had applied for? Section 22 of the 1861 Act was repealed and in the later Act, there was no corresponding provision to Section 22 but there was a saving proviso which enabled the appellant, according to him, to make an additional conditional purchase, as if Section 22 remained in force. The saving clause saved all the accrued rights and liabilities. Noticing the change in the condition of residence, which had been earlier imposed, being done away with, the Court went on to hold as follows:

Statute : 276. In Hamilton Gell v. White (1922) 2 K.B. 422, upon a quit notice given by the landlord, the tenant sought to avail the benefit of Section 11 of the Agricultural Holdings Act, 1914 by successfully complying with one out of the two conditions for seeking the compensation. Before the tenant could comply with the further condition, which was that he should move the action within two months, after quitting the holding, Section 11 was repealed. He subsequently made his claim within three months, as limited by the repealed Section. The matter went to an Arbitrator. The Arbitrator stated a special case. He raised two questions. Firstly, whether the tenant was entitled to claim compensation under the repealing Act of 1920 and, secondly, whether he could claim under the repealed Act notwithstanding the repeal. The first question was answered against the tenant, with which, the Court of Appeal agreed. As regards the second question, the Court was of the view that the tenant was entitled to succeed. The following is the reasoning, in short:

Statute : 281. Now, it is necessary to refer to the judgment of this Court in Isha Valimohamed v. Haji Gulam Mohamad & Haji Dada Trust (1974) 2 SCC 484. The facts in the said case are to be noticed in some detail for it may have bearing on the questions to be answered by us. The Respondent landlord purported to terminate the tenancy in relation to a building by a notice dated 12.02.1964 on the ground inter alia of subletting. It must be noticed that at the time the subletting took place the building was covered by Saurashtra Rent Control Act, 1951. The said Act provided that the landlord shall be entitled to recover possession in the case of subletting by the tenant. It is while this Act was in force that the tenant sublet the premises. However, the Saurashtra Act came to be repealed by the Bombay Rents, Hotels and Lodging Houses Rates Control Act, 1947 on 31.12.1963. Section 51 of the Bombay Act, inter alia, contained the saving clause that the repeal would not affect any right, privilege, obligation, liability accrued or incurred under any law so repealed. The notice, terminating tenancy was issued on 12.02.1964 after the repeal of the 'Saurashtra Act'. The High court took the view that the landlord had an accrued right under saving clause of the Bombay Act. The suit was brought after the repeal.

Statute : 288. In New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Shanti Misra (1975) 2 SCC 840, the husband of the first respondent died as a result of a motor accident. The suit could be brought under Article 82 of the Limitation Act 1963 within two years of the accident. On 18.03.1867, the Government of Uttar Pradesh constituted the claim Tribunal under Section 110 of the Motor Vehicle Act. The application of the respondents before the Tribunal was objected to by the appellant insurer. While deciding in favour of the respondents and holding that the application was maintainable before the Tribunal, this court, inter-alia, held as follows:

Statute : 292. In V. Dhanapal Chettiar v. Yesodai Ammal (1979) 4 SCC 214, a Bench of seven learned Judges while taking the view that a notice to quit under section 106 of the TP Act 1882 was not necessary for an Eviction Petition under any of the State Rent Acts observed in regard to Isha Valimohamed (supra) that the view taken in the said case that the landlord could not have issued notice to determine the tenancy on the ground of subletting under any of the provisions of Transfer of Property Act was not correct as a notice issued under Section 111 (h) does not require any ground to be made out for termination of the tenancy. It was further held that the view taken in Isha Valimohamed (supra), in this regard, would be taken only under Section 111 (g).

Statute : 294. In Mst. Bibi Sayeeda & Ors. v. State of Bihar and Others (1996) 9 SCC 516/AIR 1996 SC 1936, the Court was to dealing with the meaning of the word 'Bazar' in the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act 30 of 1950). In the course, of the said judgement the Court went on to hold that the right of the proprietor of a State to hold a 'Mela' on its own land is a right in the estate being appurtenant to the ownership of his land. In the context, of property rights undoubtedly the Court went on to make the following observations:

Legislation : We agree with the High Court that the scheme of the 1973 Act does not manifest an intention contrary to, and inconsistent with, the saving of the repealed provisions of Section 5(6-A) and Chapter III-B of "1955 Act" so far as pending cases are concerned and that the rights accrued and liabilities incurred under the old law are not effaced. Appellant's contention (a) is, in our opinion, insubstantial. Re Contention (b)"

Statute : 300. In Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra), the case arose under the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (TADA Act). Section 20(4) of TADA Act, made Section 167 of the CrPC applicable with certain modifications. Clause (b) provided for a longer period, as the period for which remand could be ordered. By an amendment, w.e.f. 22.05.1993, the period was reduced. Thereafter, however, another clause, viz., clause (bb) was added, which contained a proviso. The proviso mandated that if it was not possible to complete the investigation within a period of 180 days on the Report of the Public Prosecutor, indicating the progress of the investigation and the specific reasons for detention beyond 180 days, the designated court should extend the period upto one year. It was in the context of this provision that this Court, after noting that the amendment was retrospective and apply to pending cases, in which, the investigation was not complete on the date of the Amending Act and the challan had not been filed in the Court, the Court culled-out the following principles:

Statute : 302. In Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd. (supra), by an amendment to the Delhi Rent Control Act, while a petition for eviction by the respondent landlord was pending on the ground of subletting, exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Rent Controller with respect of tenancies fetching monthly rent exceeding Rs. 3,500/- was brought into force. The question arose, inter alia, as to whether the ground of illegal subletting was a vested right. It also fell for decision as to whether there was merit in the contention of the appellant tenant that after the amendment, the civil court alone had jurisdiction. It was the contention of the tenant that he had no vested right and the amendment was not retrospective in operation, and therefore, the civil court alone would have jurisdiction. The landlord contended that in view of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, the pending proceedings before the Rent Controller should at any rate continue even if his contention based on vested right was repelled. This Court went on to hold that the tenant had no vested right by relying on the judgment of this court in Mohinder Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and another (1985) 4 SCC 221 and also in D. C. Bhatia and others v. Union of India and another (1995) 1 SCC 104 (the latter of which decisions is relied upon by the respondent-Union for the proposition that a right to take advantage of an enactment, would not create a vested right). Thereafter, this Court went on to hold that the landlord also did not have a vested right for seeking on the ground of eviction under Section 14 of the Delhi Rent Control Act. It was found that Section 14 was only a protective right for a tenant and the various clauses which constituted a proviso to the protection from eviction by a landlord could not be construed as a vested right in favour of the landlord. Having so held, this Court went on to consider the effect of a repeal of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act. Therein, this Court went on to hold that the respondent-landlord had a right to continue the proceedings before the Rent Control Board under Section 6 of the General Clauses Act. It would be an accrued right in terms of Section 6. We need only notice paragraphs-26, 35 and 36 of Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd.(supra):

Statute : 306. We may observe that the decisions of this Court in Arcelormittal India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and Swiss Robbins (supra) are inappropriate to the context of the cases before us. We may also notice the decision of the Court of Appeal in West vs. Gwynne (1910) WLR 976. The plaintiff in the said case who was the landlord of the property wrote to the defendant, his tenant for his consent for the proposed underlease. The defendant insisted however on receiving for himself one half of the surplus rental as a condition for the consent. The suit filed by the plaintiff was for a declaration that the defendant could not impose such a condition and that he could give the underlease without any further consent of the defendant. In the year 1892 (after the lease), section 3 of the Conveyancing Act 1892 was enacted. The question which arose was whether it would apply to existing leases as well as and was of general application or it should be confined to leases after the commencement of the Act. The said section provided that in all leases containing a covenant against assigning or under letting without license or consent such covenant should unless the lease contain an express provision to the contrary be deemed subject to the proviso that no fine shall be payable for or in respect of such license or consent. The court took the view that the words of the section was clear. In fact, we may profitably notice the words of Joyce, J. whose judgment was the subject matter of the appeal "the section with which we have to deal with in this case is quite plain to everyone but a lawyer". The court of appeal took the view that the provision was a general enactment based on ground of public policy, Cozens Hardy M.R. while agreeing with the general proposition that a statute is presumed not to have retrospective operation unless a contrary intention appears by express words or by necessary implication held as follows:

Statute : 308. Reliance has been placed on the judgment of this court in B.K. Educational Services Private Limited v. Parag Gupta and Associates (2019)11 SCC 633 which was rendered by one of us (R.F. Nariman, J.). By an amendment to the Code with effect from 6.6.2018 Section 238A was inserted by which the Limitation Act, 1963, was made applicable to the proceedings and appeals before the authorities including the appellate tribunal. The question which fell for decision was whether the Limitation Act 1963 would also apply in respect of application under Section 7 inter alia on and from the commencement of the Code on 1.12.2016 till the date of the amendment that is 6.6.2018. In answering this question, this court went on to hold that the CIRP can only be initiated either by a financial or operational creditor in relation to debts which have not become time barred. In the course of its judgment, this Court referred to the earlier judgment of this Court including the recent judgment of this Court in M.P. Steel Corporation v. Commissioner of Central Excise (2015) 7 SCC 58. In the said decision, this Court has relied upon the earlier judgment reported in Smt. Shanti Misra (supra) wherein it was laid down inter alia as follows:

Statute : 311. Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure contemplates rejection of a plaint, if it does not disclose a cause of action. The cause of action in a suit, will consist of the facts, which, if not traversed by the defendant, will entitle the plaintiff to a Decree. The Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963, consisting of three columns. The third column, provides for the time, from which, the period begins to run for different suits. Article 19 provides for money payable for money lent. The period of three years, prescribed as period of limitation, begins to run from the point of time, when the loan is made. This means that, at any point of time, after the loan is made, but within three years, ordinarily, a civil suit is to be filed. In the example, we have given, if a suit is filed towards the end of the three-year period, would it be said that the right to sue was not available from the first day, when the period of limitation began to run? We will take another example. Article 73 provides for a period of one year for a suit for compensation for false imprisonment. The time, from which the period begins to run, is when the imprisonment ends. Can it not be said that the prisoner, upon his incarceration coming to an end, is clothed with a vested right to sue? We would think, that he is given a right, which is vested in him, when the imprisonment ends. In fact, it is the illegal imprisonment which is really creates the vested right but the period of limitation begins on sound policy only after his release. Article 113 of the Limitation Act, provides for suits for which there is no period provided in the schedule. The period of 03 years provided begins to run when the right to sue accrues. If the right to sue 'accrued' within the meaning of Article 113, can it still be said, that for the purpose of deciding, the effect of a law purporting to impact the right, there is no vested right or accrued right till the suit is filed? We will give another example and that is Article 30, which gives a right to sue on the bond subject to a condition. The period of limitation is three years. The time begins to run when the condition is broken. The right to sue clearly could be said to arise, immediately upon the condition being broken. We may, in this context also, notice that one of the five characteristics for a legal right to exist, is that every legal right has a title. It is further stated, in Salmond on Jurisprudence that every legal right has a title, which are apparently the facts or events by reason of which the right has become vested in its owner. Now, it must be noticed also, at this stage that the Limitation Act, in fact, contemplates the time, within which the suit must be brought, beginning necessarily on the supposition, that at least, on the very first day of the period of time, from which a plaintiff can sue, the right is already vested in him. This would reinforce us in our view that a vested right to sue could be said to accrue, and it would always precede the institution of the suit. At any rate, it could be said to exist from the very first day, on which the time begins to run, under the Limitation Act. Thus, a vested right to sue could be tested with reference not to the date on which the suit is filed as would be the case where a question arises, whether a right of appeal exists.

Statute : 312. However, we must consider whether a right of suit is conferred by a statute. In this regard, we may notice the decision of this Court in Mardia Chemicals Ltd. and others v. Union of India and others (2004) 4 SCC 311. Therein the validity of certain provisions of the SARFAESI Act 2002, was questioned. Of relevance to us, in these cases is the discussion of this Court relating to the vires of Section 17(2). The said provision contemplated a pre-deposit of 75 per cent of the amount by the applicant under Section 17 before the Tribunal. This Court found the condition of pre-deposit arbitrary and unreasonable. In this context, this court also noted the distinction between a civil suit and an appeal and it was found that an application maintained under section 17 was in the nature of a suit, it is apposite that we notice the following:

Statute : 322. In K.S. Paripoornan v. State of Kerala (1994) 5 SCC 593, the Constitution Bench had to consider whether Section 23 (I-A) and introduced by the amending Act 1984 was retrospective. In the majority judgement by S. C. Agrawal, J., we notice the following:

Statute : SECTION 6 OF GENERAL CLAUSES ACT, 1897

Statute : 351. The other way of looking at these issues is that Order XXIII(1) applies only in the case of a civil suit. In regard to the application under Article 137 which is what an application under Section 7 of the Code is, it could it be said that Order XXIII(1) is inapplicable. Secondly, could it not be said that it is not a case of a voluntary withdrawal by the applicant and the withdrawal of the application is declared by the Legislature, and therefore, Order XXIII(1) would not apply. 352. Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963 reads as follows:

Statute : ii. Secondly, we direct that if applications are moved under Section 7 by the petitioners, within a period of two months from today, in compliance with either of the provisos, as the case may be, and the application would be barred under Article 137 of the Limitation Act, on the default alleged in the applications, which were already filed, if the petitioner file applications under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963, the period of time spent before the Adjudicating Authority, the Adjudicating Authority shall allow the applications and the period of delay shall be condoned in regard to the period, during which, the earlier applications filed by them, which is the subject matter of the third proviso, was pending before the Adjudicating Authority.

