Statute : 1d. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1024 of 2020 has been preferred under Article 32 of the Constitution of India by the petitioner - Confederation of Real Estate Developers Association of India (CREDAI), for and on behalf of the private real estate developers in Chhattisgarh, also challenging notification dated 27.03.2020 issued by the RBI to the extent charging interest on the loan amount during the moratorium period. It is also prayed for an appropriate writ, direction or order directing the respondents - Union of India to take adequate measures of reliefs to the disaster affected persons in accordance with letter and spirit of Disaster Management Act, 2005, more particularly Sections 12 and 13 of the said Act, more particularly to the reliefs with respect to waiver of loan and/or interest on all kind of loans availed by the borrowers/disaster affected persons through a well informed and formulated policy.

Statute : 1e. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1025 of 2020 under Article 32 of the Constitution of India has been preferred by the Chhattisgarh Sponge Iron Manufacturers Association, also challenging notification dated 27.03.2020 issued by the RBI, which has been further extended vide notification dated 23.05.2020 to the extent it charges interest on the loan amount during the moratorium period. It is also prayed to direct the Union of India and others to take steps/grant reliefs to the disaster affected persons in accordance with letter and spirit of Disaster Management Act, 2005, more particularly in terms of Sections 12 and 13 of the said Act.

Statute : 1u. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1157 of 2020 under Article 32 of the Constitution of India has been preferred by the Chhattisgarh Udyog Mahasangh also challenging notifications dated 27.03.2020 and 23.05.2020 to the extent charging interest/interest on interest (penal interest) on the loan amount during the moratorium period. It is also prayed to direct the Union of India to take adequate and effective measures of reliefs to the disaster affected persons in accordance with letter and spirit of Disaster Management Act, 2005, more particularly in terms of Sections 12 and 13 of the said Act, and such reliefs including inter alia suitable waiver of loan and/or interest on all kind of loans availed by the borrowers/disaster affected persons through a well informed and formulated policy.

Statute : (iii) that the "disaster management" must be and can only be addressed under the statutory regime of law enacted by the Parliament. The question of executive response will come into play only after the special law on the aspect of "disaster management" has run its full course. There is no way that the issues arising out of the disaster of Covid-19 can be addressed without travelling the course of path under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the "DMA 2005");

Statute : (i) that the RBI has been constituted by the provisions of Section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (for short, 'RBI Act'). It has been vested with the responsibility of superintendence and control of the banking business in the country under the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (for short, 'BR Act'). That in view of the various provisions of the BR Act and the RBI Act, the RBI is obliged to see that the banking business is carried on by banks, prudently and adhering to sound principles of banking. That the BR Act has conferred upon the RBI the powers to issue directions under Section 35A to the banking companies generally or to any banking company in particular, in public interest or in the interest of the Banking Policy or to prevent the affairs of the banking company being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of its depositors or in a manner prejudicial to the banking company. Furthermore, under Section 21 of the BR Act, the RBI is conferred with specific powers to determine the policy in relation to advances to be followed by the banking companies;

