                                                                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NOs.4230-4234 OF 2020


             A. Navinchandra Steels Private Limited ...Appellant


                                  VERSUS


             SREI Equipment Finance Limited & Ors. ...Respondents


                                                                J U D G M E N T


             R.F. Nariman, J.

. This appeal arises out of the judgment dated 07.02.2020, as

             corrected by order dated 21.09.2020, by the National Company Law

             Appellate Tribunal ["NCLAT"]. The Appellant is an operational creditor of

             Respondent No.2 herein - M/s. Shree Ram Urban Infrastructure Limited

             ["SRUIL"], the company under winding up - and has a decree dated

             07.10.2015 in its favour passed by the Bombay High Court in Summary

Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R Suit No.626 of 2014. Vide order dated 06.10.2016, the Division Bench
Natarajan
Date: 2021.03.01
16:52:04 IST
Reason:
             stayed the order dated 07.10.2015 and directed SRUIL to deposit INR14


                                                                                                                                                 1
crore with the Prothonotary and Senior Master of the High Court or furnish

a bank guarantee for the same, failing which the stay order would get

vacated. The said appeal is pending as on date. We are also informed that

an execution application, being Execution Application (L) No.934 of 2016

was filed by the Appellant before the Bombay High Court and the same is

also pending as on date.


2. Sometime in 2015, the Appellant had filed a winding up petition, being

Company Petition No.1039 of 2015 against SRUIL before the Bombay High

Court, the same being pending as on date.


3. A winding up petition, being Company Petition No.1066/2015 filed by

Respondent No.3 herein, M/s Action Barter Pvt. Ltd. ["Action Barter"]

against SRUIL, by a conditional order dated 05.10.2016, stood admitted on

the failure of SRUIL to deposit INR 5.90 crore. The appeal instituted by

SRUIL against this order was dismissed by the Division Bench of the High

Court on 17.01.2017, whereas the appeal instituted by Action Barter was

allowed vide the same order and the amount to be deposited by SRUIL was

enhanced from INR 5.90 crore to INR 18 crore. Vide order dated

27.02.2017, this Court disposed of SLP(C) No.5849/2017 filed by SRUIL,

after recording a statement by the counsel for SRUIL that SRUIL would



deposit INR three crore the same day, and the balance of INR 15 crore

within six months from the date of the order. The parties then filed consent

terms before the Single Judge of the Bombay High Court on 22.03.2017,

wherein Action Barter agreed to accept a sum of INR 15 crore, payable in

instalments. Apart from the payment of the first instalment of INR 25 lakh,

no further instalment was paid, as a result of which the winding up petition

stood revived on 24.08.2017. On 17.04.2018, the provisional liquidator took

over the physical possession of the assets of SRUIL.


4. While this winding up petition was pending, Indiabulls Housing

Finance Ltd. ["Indiabulls"], a secured creditor of SRUIL, filed a petition

under Section 7 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 ["IBC"]

before the National Company Law Tribunal ["NCLT"], which was dismissed

by the NCLT vide order dated 18.05.2018 as being not maintainable as a

winding up petition had already been admitted by the Bombay High Court.

An appeal to the NCLAT suffered a similar fate as the appeal was

dismissed on 30.05.2018. However, on 06.08.2018, the Supreme Court

admitted a Civil Appeal from the NCLAT order, which is pending as on date.

5. An application filed by Indiabulls for the following relief:

          "The Hon'ble Court be pleased to direct the Provisional
          Liquidator to handover physical possession of the said
          Mortgaged Property i.e. all the pieces and parcels of land



          bearing C.S. Nos. 288, 289 (part), 1/1540 (part), 2/1540 (part)
          and 3/1540 (part), collectively forming Plot Nos.5B and 6
          admeasuring approximately 28,409.57 square meters situated
          at Worli Estate, Lower Parel Division, Mumbai to the Secured
          Creditor herein, in accordance with and pursuant to the
          provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 and the Securitisation
          and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
          Security Interest Act, 2002 ..."

resulted in an order dated 07.02.2019 by which the learned Company

Judge allowed the aforesaid application in favour of Indiabulls. Indiabulls is

a secured creditor who stood outside the winding up, and who sought to

realise its security outside such winding up proceeding, notices having

already been issued under Sections 13(2) and 13(4) of the Securitisation

and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security

Interest Act, 2002 ["SARFAESI Act"]. The Court referred to an order of

12.04.2018, by which the provisional liquidator was to take physical

possession of the assets of SRUIL within one week of the date of that order.

Importantly, paragraph 2 of the said order stated:

          "2. Ms. Maitra states that the secured creditors have already
          commenced proceedings under SARFAESI against the
          company. As and when the banks may take out an application
          for banks submissions to hand over that part of the assets
          secured to the bank, appropriate orders will be passed."

6. This being the case, the learned Company Judge allowed the

application in the following terms:



          "13. For the reasons aforesaid, the present Application is
          allowed. The Provisional Liquidator is directed to forthwith
          handover possession of the Mortgaged Property to the
          Applicant. However, the Applicant shall conduct the sale of the
          property in consultation with the Official Liquidator. The
          Applicant shall also deposit the sale proceeds or part thereof
          with this Court as and when the Court directs the Applicant to
          do so, for the purpose of making payments to workers as
          prescribed in section 529A of the Companies Act, 1956."


7. As per the aforesaid order dated 07.02.2019, the provisional

liquidator handed over possession of the property mortgaged with

Indiabulls to Indiabulls, who then conducted a sale of the said property to

M/s. Honest Shelters Pvt. Ltd. ["Honest Shelters"], Respondent No.4

herein, for a sum of INR 705 crore, in which not only was the mortgaged

property sold, but also the superstructure standing thereon, together with

two other flats. We have since been informed that three sale certificates

were issued to Honest Shelters on 26.06.2019 by Indiabulls on receiving

the said payment of INR 705 crore. We have also been informed that the

ex-Directors of SRUIL had challenged the aforesaid sale in the Debt

Recovery Tribunal and the Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal

unsuccessfully. The provisional liquidator has also challenged the said sale

in the Bombay High Court, alleging that the conditions of the order dated

07.02.2019 were flouted, and that what was sold was much more than what

was mortgaged to the secured creditor, and that too at a gross undervalue.



We are informed that the next date in these pending proceedings is

23.03.2021.


8. Meanwhile, Respondent No.1 before us, i.e., SREI Equipment

Finance Limited ["SREI"] filed a petition under Section 7 of the IBC before

the NCLT, which petition was admitted by the NCLT on 06.11.2019. An

appeal was then filed by Action Barter against the aforesaid NCLT order in

which, after setting out this Court's judgment in Forech (India) Ltd. v.

Edelweiss Assets Reconstruction Co. Ltd., (2019) 18 SCC 549

["Forech"], the NCLAT dismissed the appeal with the following

observations:

          "5. The case of the Appellant is covered by the decision of the
          Hon'ble Supreme Court in Forech India Ltd (supra), therefore,
          we hold that the Application under Section 7 of the I&B Code
          filed by the Respondent - SREI Equipment Finance Limited is
          not maintainable. In so far as pending winding up petition
          before the Hon'ble Bombay High Court is concerned, the
          Appellant in terms of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
          in Forech India Ltd (supra) may move before the Hon'ble High
          Court of Bombay.
          The Appeal is dismissed with the aforesaid observations. No
          costs."

9. By an order dated 21.09.2020, the NCLAT corrected the order by

deleting the word "not" that occurred in paragraph 5 of the order dated

07.02.2020.



10. An appeal was then filed to this Court by Action Barter on 08.10.2020,

in which this Court, by order dated 27.10.2020, issued notice and directed

the parties to maintain status quo qua the mortgaged property and also

stayed further proceedings before the NCLAT. An appeal was also filed by

the Appellant on 09.12.2020, in which this Court, by order dated

18.12.2020, issued notice and stayed further proceedings before the NCLT

and tagged the appeal with the appeal filed by Action Barter.


11. We have been informed that pursuant to a settlement between Action

Barter and the purchaser of the mortgaged property, i.e., Honest Shelters,

Action Barter has now withdrawn its appeal that was filed before this Court.

Thus, the only surviving appeal before us is Civil Appeal Nos.4230-4234 of

2020, filed by A. Navinchandra Steels Pvt. Ltd.


12. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior

Advocates appearing on behalf of the Appellant, argued that in view of the

judgment in Action Ispat and Power Pvt. Ltd. v. Shyam Metalics and

Energy Ltd., 2020 SCC OnLine SC 1025 ["Action Ispat"], this matter is

concluded in their favour inasmuch as irreversible steps have been taken

in a winding up petition that has already been admitted by the Bombay High

Court in that the plot on which a 72-storey building stands, has now been



sold, as a result of which it is now clear that the Section 7 petition that was

filed by SREI on 30.05.2019 under the IBC, would have to be held to be

non-maintainable. They also argued that the effect of Section 446 of the

Companies Act, 1956 (which is equivalent to Section 279 of the Companies

Act, 2013) is that no suit or other legal proceeding can be initiated once

there is admission of a winding up petition. This being the case, post

admission of a winding up petition, no petition under Section 7 of the IBC

can be filed. They also argued that it is a misnomer to think that winding up

proceedings must result in corporate death. On the contrary, according to

them, Sections 391 to 393 of the Companies Act, 1956 would apply if the

company were to be restructured, as a result of which the winding up court

could then stay the winding up and order restructuring. The learned counsel

have also argued that there are gross malafides in the present case as

SREI was not only aware of the winding up petition before the Bombay High

Court, but has also participated in the winding up proceeding and filed its

claim before the provisional liquidator. All this has been suppressed in the

petition filed under Section 7 of the IBC. Further, the only route available to

SREI was really to ask for transfer of the company petition in winding up

from the Bombay High Court to the NCLT, which route has been



circumvented by filing a Section 7 petition and suppressing the winding up

proceeding.


13. Shri Abhijeet Sinha, learned counsel appearing on behalf of SREI,

took us through various judgments of this Court, including the latest

judgment in Action Ispat (supra). According to him, a Section 7 proceeding

under the IBC is an independent proceeding, which can be initiated at any

time, even after a winding up order is made. He argued that this was a

result of our decisions and that Section 238 of the IBC, which contains a

non-obstante clause, clearly comes to his rescue as, if there is any conflict

between Section 446 of the Companies Act, 1956 / Section 279 of the

Companies Act, 2013 and the IBC, the IBC will prevail. According to him,

this point is no longer res integra. He also argued, in the alternative, that

there are no irretrievable steps that have been taken in the winding up

proceeding in the present case, as the provisional liquidator continues to

be seized of other assets of SRUIL. He further argued that a private sale

by a secured creditor outside the winding up is not the irretrievable step

that is spoken of in Action Ispat (supra), such step having to be taken by

the provisional liquidator himself in selling the assets of the company in the

process of winding up the company. He also added that, on facts, two

orders dated 28.11.2019 and 20.01.2020 of the Bombay High Court would



indicate that the Company Court itself had directed the provisional

liquidator to hand over the records and assets of SRUIL to the interim

resolution professional ["IRP"] that had been appointed in the Section 7

proceeding. Doubtless, such assets had not been handed over because

they were only to the handed over two weeks after certain payments had

been made by the IRP to the provisional liquidator, which payments have

not yet been made.


14. Having heard learned counsel for all the parties, it is important to

restate a few fundamentals. Given the object of the IBC as delineated in

paragraphs 25 to 28 of Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2019)

4 SCC 17 ["Swiss Ribbons"], it is clear that the IBC is a special statute

dealing with revival of companies that are in the red, winding up only being

resorted to in case all attempts of revival fail. Vis--vis the Companies Act,

which is a general statute dealing with companies, including companies

that are in the red, the IBC is not only a special statute which must prevail

in the event of conflict, but has a non-obstante clause contained in Section

238, which makes it even clearer that in case of conflict, the provisions of

the IBC will prevail.








15. In Allahabad Bank v. Canara Bank, (2000) 4 SCC 406, this Court

had to deal with whether the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial

Institutions Act, 1993 ["RDB Act"] was a special statute qua the Companies

Act, 1956. This Court held that the Companies Act is a general Act and

does not prevail against the RDB Act, which was a later Act and which has

a non-obstante clause that clearly excludes the provisions of the

Companies Act in case of conflict. This was stated by the Court as follows:

          "Special law v. general law
          38. At the same time, some High Courts have rightly held that
          the Companies Act is a general Act and does not prevail under
          the RDB Act. They have relied upon Union of India v. India
          Fisheries (P) Ltd. [AIR 1966 SC 35 : (1965) 3 SCR 679 : (1965)
          57 ITR 331].
          39. There can be a situation in law where the same statute is
          treated as a special statute vis--vis one legislation and again
          as a general statute vis--vis yet another legislation. Such
          situations do arise as held in LIC of India v. D.J. Bahadur
          [(1981) 1 SCC 315 : 1981 SCC (L&S) 111 : AIR 1980 SC 2181].
          It was there observed:
                     "... for certain cases, an Act may be general and for
                     certain other purposes, it may be special and the
                     court cannot blur a distinction when dealing with the
                     finer points of law".
          For example, a Rent Control Act may be a special statute as
          compared to the Code of Civil Procedure. But vis--vis an Act
          permitting eviction from public premises or some special class
          of buildings, the Rent Control Act may be a general statute. In
          fact in Damji Valji Shah v. LIC of India [AIR 1966 SC 135 :
          (1965) 3 SCR 665] (already referred to), this Court has
          observed that vis--vis the LIC Act, 1956, the Companies Act,


1956 can be treated as a general statute. This is clear from
para 19 of that judgment. It was observed:
        "Further, the provisions of the special Act, i.e., the
        LIC Act, will override the provisions of the general
        Act, viz., the Companies Act which is an Act
        relating to companies in general."
                                                          (emphasis in original)
Thus, some High Courts rightly treated the Companies Act as
a general statute, and the RDB Act as a special statute
overriding the general statute.
Special law v. special law
40. Alternatively, the Companies Act, 1956 and the RDB Act
can both be treated as special laws, and the principle that when
there are two special laws, the latter will normally prevail over
the former if there is a provision in the latter special Act giving
it overriding effect, can also be applied. Such a provision is
there in the RDB Act, namely, Section 34. A similar situation
arose in Maharashtra Tubes Ltd. v. State Industrial and
Investment Corpn. of Maharashtra Ltd. [(1993) 2 SCC 144]
where there was inconsistency between two special laws, the
Finance Corporation Act, 1951 and the Sick Industries
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985. The latter contained
Section 32 which gave overriding effect to its provisions and
was held to prevail over the former. It was pointed out by
Ahmadi, J. that both special statutes contained non obstante
clauses but that the
        "1985 Act being a subsequent enactment, the non
        obstante clause therein would ordinarily prevail
        over the non obstante clause in Section 46-B of the
        1951 Act unless it is found that the 1985 Act is a
        general statute and the 1951 Act is a special one".
        (SCC p. 157, para 9)
Therefore, in view of Section 34 of the RDB Act, the said Act
overrides the Companies Act, to the extent there is anything
inconsistent between the Acts."




16. Likewise, in Bakemans Industries (P) Ltd. v. New Cawnpore Flour

Mills, (2008) 15 SCC 1, this Court, in the context of the State Financial

Corporations Act, 1951 ["SFC Act"] and the Companies Act, 1956, held that

though the SFC Act was an earlier Act of 1951, yet, it would prevail over

the winding up proceedings before a Company Judge, given that the SFC

Act is a special statute qua the general powers of the Company Judge

under the Companies Act. This was stated as follows:

        "37. The 1951 Act indisputably is a special statute. If a financial
        corporation intends to exercise a statutory power under Section
        29 of the 1951 Act, the same will prevail over the general
        powers of the Company Judge under the Companies Act.
        38. There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the
        proceedings under Section 29 of the 1951 Act would prevail
        over a winding-up proceeding before a Company Judge in view
        of the decision of this Court in International Coach Builders
        Ltd. v. Karnataka State Financial Corpn. [(2003) 10 SCC 482]
        wherein it has been held: (SCC p. 496, para 26)
                "26. We do not really see a conflict between Section
                29 of the SFC Act and the Companies Act at all,
                since the rights under Section 29 were not intended
                to operate in the situation of winding up of a
                company. Even assuming to the contrary, if a
                conflict arises, then we respectfully reiterate the
                view taken by the Division Bench of this Court in
                A.P. State Financial Corpn. Case [A.P. State
                Financial Corpn. v. Official Liquidator, (2000) 7
                SCC 291]. This Court pointed out therein that
                Section 29 of the SFC Act cannot override the
                provisions of Sections 529(1) and 529-A of the
                Companies Act, 1956, inasmuch as SFCs cannot
                exercise the right under Section 29 ignoring a pari
                passu charge of the workmen."



The view taken therein was reiterated by a three-Judge Bench
of this Court in Rajasthan State Financial Corpn. v. Official
Liquidator [(2005) 8 SCC 190] wherein it was stated: (SCC pp.
201-02, para 18)
        "18. In the light of the discussion as above, we think
        it proper to sum up the legal position thus:
        (i) A Debts Recovery Tribunal acting under the
        Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
        Institutions Act, 1993 would be entitled to order the
        sale and to sell the properties of the debtor, even if
        a company-in-liquidation, through its Recovery
        Officer but only after notice to the Official Liquidator
        or the Liquidator appointed by the Company Court
        and after hearing him.
        (ii) A District Court entertaining an application
        under Section 31 of the SFC Act will have the power
        to order sale of the assets of a borrower company-
        in-liquidation, but only after notice to the Official
        Liquidator or the Liquidator appointed by the
        Company Court and after hearing him.
        (iii) If a financial corporation acting under Section
        29 of the SFC Act seeks to sell or otherwise transfer
        the assets of a debtor company-in-liquidation, the
        said power could be exercised by it only after
        obtaining the appropriate permission from the
        Company Court and acting in terms of the
        directions issued by that court as regards
        associating the Official Liquidator with the sale, the
        fixing of the upset price or the reserve price,
        confirmation of the sale, holding of the sale
        proceeds and the distribution thereof among the
        creditors in terms of Section 529-A and Section 529
        of the Companies Act.
        (iv) In a case where proceedings under the
        Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
        Institutions Act, 1993 or the SFC Act are not set in
        motion, the creditor concerned is to approach the
        Company Court for appropriate directions
        regarding the realisation of its securities consistent


                with the relevant provisions of the Companies Act
                regarding distribution of the assets of the company-
                in-liquidation."
        (See also ICICI Bank Ltd. v. SIDCO Leathers Ltd. [(2006) 10
        SCC 452 : (2006) 5 Scale 27])"


17. In Madras Petrochem Ltd. v. BIFR, (2016) 4 SCC 1, this Court had

to deal with whether a predecessor statute to the IBC, which has been

repealed by the IBC, namely, the Sick Industrial Companies (Special

Provisions) Act, 1985, prevails over the SARFAESI Act to the extent of

inconsistency therewith. This Court noted that in the case of two statutes

which contain non-obstante clauses, the later Act will normally prevail,

holding:

        "36. A conspectus of the aforesaid decisions shows that the
        Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985
        prevails in all situations where there are earlier enactments with
        non obstante clauses similar to the Sick Industrial Companies
        (Special Provisions) Act, 1985. Where there are later
        enactments with similar non obstante clauses, the Sick
        Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 has been
        held to prevail only in a situation where the reach of the non
        obstante clause in the later Act is limited-such as in the case
        of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996-or in the case of
        the later Act expressly yielding to the Sick Industrial Companies
        (Special Provisions) Act, 1985, as in the case of the Recovery
        of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993.
        Where such is not the case, as in the case of Special Courts
        Act, 1992, it is the Special Courts Act, 1992 which was held to
        prevail over the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)
        Act, 1985.



37. We have now to undertake an analysis of the Acts in
question. The first thing to be noticed is the difference between
Section 37 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 and
Section 34 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and
Financial Institutions Act, 1993. Section 37 of the Securitisation
and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002 does not include the Sick Industrial
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 unlike Section 34(2)
of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993. Section 37 of the Securities and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002 states that the said Act shall be in
addition to and not in derogation of four Acts, namely, the
Companies Act, the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,
1956, the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
and the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993. It is clear that the first three Acts deal with
securities generally and the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks
and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 deals with recovery of debts
due to banks and financial institutions. Interestingly, Section 41
of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets
and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 makes
amendments in three Acts-the Companies Act, the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, and the Sick Industrial
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985. It is of great
significance that only the first two Acts are included in Section
37 and not the third i.e. the Sick Industrial Companies (Special
Provisions) Act, 1985. This is for the obvious reason that the
framers of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 intended
that the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,
1985 be covered by the non obstante clause contained in
Section 35, and not by the exception thereto carved out by
Section 37. Further, whereas the Recovery of Debts Due to
Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 is expressly
mentioned in Section 37, the Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions) Act, 1985 is not, making the above position
further clear. And this is in stark contrast, as has been stated
above, to Section 34(2) of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks



        and Financial Institutions Act, 1993, which expressly included
        the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985.
        The new legislative scheme qua recovery of debts contained in
        the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
        Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 has, therefore, to be
        given precedence over the Sick Industrial Companies (Special
        Provisions) Act, 1985, unlike the old scheme for recovery of
        debts contained in the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and
        Financial Institutions Act, 1993."


18. Indeed, this position has been echoed in several judgments of this

Court. In Jaipur Metals & Electricals Employees Organization v. Jaipur

Metals & Electricals Ltd., (2019) 4 SCC 227 ["Jaipur Metals"], this Court,

in dealing with whether proceedings under the Sick Industrial Companies

(Special Provisions) Act, 1985 were to be transferred to the NCLT under

the IBC, held:

        "19. However, this does not end the matter. It is clear that
        Respondent 3 has filed a Section 7 application under the Code
        on 11-1-2018, on which an order has been passed admitting
        such application by NCLT on 13-4-2018. This proceeding is an
        independent proceeding which has nothing to do with the
        transfer of pending winding-up proceedings before the High
        Court. It was open for Respondent 3 at any time before a
        winding-up order is passed to apply under Section 7 of the
        Code. This is clear from a reading of Section 7 together with
        Section 238 of the Code which reads as follows:
                "238. Provisions of this Code to override other
                laws.-The provisions of this Code shall have
                effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
                therewith contained in any other law for the time
                being in force or any instrument having effect by
                virtue of any such law."



        20. Shri Dave's ingenious argument that since Section 434 of
        the Companies Act, 2013 is amended by the Eleventh
        Schedule to the Code, the amended Section 434 must be read
        as being part of the Code and not the Companies Act, 2013,
        must be rejected for the reason that though Section 434 of the
        Companies Act, 2013 is substituted by the Eleventh Schedule
        to the Code, yet Section 434, as substituted, appears only in
        the Companies Act, 2013 and is part and parcel of that Act. This
        being so, if there is any inconsistency between Section 434 as
        substituted and the provisions of the Code, the latter must
        prevail. We are of the view that NCLT was absolutely correct in
        applying Section 238 of the Code to an independent proceeding
        instituted by a secured financial creditor, namely, the Alchemist
        Asset Reconstruction Company Ltd. This being the case, it is
        difficult to comprehend how the High Court could have held that
        the proceedings before NCLT were without jurisdiction. On this
        score, therefore, the High Court judgment has to be set aside.
        NCLT proceedings will now continue from the stage at which
        they have been left off. Obviously, the company petition
        pending before the High Court cannot be proceeded with
        further in view of Section 238 of the Code. The writ petitions
        that are pending before the High Court have also to be
        disposed of in light of the fact that proceedings under the Code
        must run their entire course. We, therefore, allow the appeal
        and set aside the High Court's judgment [Jaipur Metals and
        Electricals Ltd., In re, 2018 SCC OnLine Raj 1472]."

19. Likewise, in Forech (supra), in a situation in which notice had been

issued in a winding up petition and the said petition was ordered to be

transferred to the NCLT, to be treated as a proceeding under the IBC, this

Court clearly held:

        "22. This section is of limited application and only bars a
        corporate debtor from initiating a petition under Section 10 of
        the Code in respect of whom a liquidation order has been
        made. From a reading of this section, it does not follow that until



          a liquidation order has been made against the corporate debtor,
          an insolvency petition may be filed under Section 7 or Section
          9 as the case may be, as has been held by the Appellate
          Tribunal. Hence, any reference to Section 11 in the context of
          the problem before us is wholly irrelevant. However, we decline
          to interfere with the ultimate order passed by the Appellate
          Tribunal because it is clear that the financial creditor's
          application which has been admitted by the Tribunal is clearly
          an independent proceeding which must be decided in
          accordance with the provisions of the Code."


20. In Duncans Industries Ltd. v. AJ Agrochem, (2019) 9 SCC 725,

this Court was faced with a situation of conflict between Section 16-G(1)(c)

of the Tea Act, 1953, under which winding up/liquidation proceedings were

to take place (and which could not take place without prior consent of the

Central Government), and a proceeding initiated under Section 9 of the

IBC. After relying upon the judgment of this Court in Innoventive

Industries Ltd. v. ICICI Bank, (2018) 1 SCC 407 and Swiss Ribbons

(supra), this Court held:

          "7.4. Section 16-G(1)(c) refers to the proceeding for winding up
          of such company or for the appointment of receiver in respect
          thereof. Therefore, as such, the proceedings under Section 9
          IBC shall not be limited and/or restricted to winding up and/or
          appointment of receiver only. The winding up/liquidation of the
          company shall be the last resort and only on an eventuality
          when the corporate insolvency resolution process fails. As
          observed by this Court in Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. [Swiss
          Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2019) 4 SCC 17 : AIR 2019
          SC 739], referred to hereinabove, the primary focus of the
          legislation while enacting IBC is to ensure revival and
          continuation of the corporate debtor by protecting the corporate



        debtor from its own management and from a corporate debt by
        liquidation and such corporate insolvency resolution process is
        to be completed in a time-bound manner. Therefore, the entire
        "corporate insolvency resolution process" as such cannot be
        equated with "winding up proceedings". Therefore, considering
        Section 238 IBC, which is a subsequent Act to the Tea Act,
        1953, shall be applicable and the provisions of IBC shall have
        an overriding effect over the Tea Act, 1953. Any other view
        would frustrate the object and purpose of IBC. If the submission
        on behalf of the appellant that before initiation of proceedings
        under Section 9 IBC, the consent of the Central Government as
        provided under Section 16-G(1)(c) of the Tea Act is to be
        obtained, in that case, the main object and purpose of IBC,
        namely, to complete the "corporate insolvency resolution
        process" in a time-bound manner, shall be frustrated. The sum
        and substance of the above discussion would be that the
        provisions of IBC would have an overriding effect over the Tea
        Act, 1953 and that no prior consent of the Central Government
        before initiation of the proceedings under Section 7 or Section
        9 IBC would be required and even without such consent of the
        Central Government, the insolvency proceedings under
        Section 7 or Section 9 IBC initiated by the operational creditor
        shall be maintainable."


21. In Kaledonia Jute and Fibres Pvt. Ltd. v. Axis Nirman and

Industries Ltd., 2020 SCC OnLine SC 943 ["Kaledonia"], this Court

decided as to whether a winding up proceeding in the Company Court could

be transferred despite the fact that the winding up order had been passed

and then been kept in abeyance. This Court, in paragraph 27, held:

        "27. Apart from providing for the transfer of certain types of
        winding up proceedings by operation of law, Section 434(1)(c)
        also gives a choice to the parties to those proceedings to seek
        a transfer of such proceedings to the NCLT. This is under the
        fifth proviso to Clause (c)."




The Court then went on to hold that in a winding up proceeding that has

been admitted, since all creditors would be parties to such proceeding in

rem, a secured creditor being such a party could, therefore, move the

Company Court under the fifth proviso to Section 434(1)(c) of the

Companies Act, 2013 to transfer the aforesaid proceeding to the NCLT to

be tried as a proceeding under Section 7 or Section 9, as the case may be.


22. In Action Ispat (supra), this Court was faced with a proceeding in

which a winding up petition had been admitted by the High Court and then

transferred to the NCLT to be tried as a proceeding under the IBC. After

referring to the judgments in Jaipur Metals (supra), Forech (supra), and

Kaledonia (supra), and after setting out various Sections dealing with

winding up of companies under the Companies Act, 2013, this Court then

held:

          "20. What becomes clear upon a reading of the three
          judgments of this Court is the following:
          (i) So far as transfer of winding up proceedings is
          concerned, the Code began tentatively by leaving proceedings
          relating to winding up of companies to be transferred to NCLT
          at a stage as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
          (ii) This was done by the Transfer Rules, 2016 [Companies
          (Transfer of Pending Proceedings) Rules, 2016] which came
          into force with effect from 15.12.2016. Rules 5 and 6 referred
          to three types of proceedings. Only those proceedings which



are at the stage of pre-service of notice of the winding up
petition stand compulsorily transferred to the NCLT.
(iii) The result therefore was that post notice and pre
admission of winding up petitions, parallel proceedings would
continue under both statutes, leading to a most unsatisfactory
state of affairs. This led to the introduction of the 5th proviso to
section 434(1)(c) which, as has been correctly pointed out
in Kaledonia [Kaledonia Jute & Fibres Pvt. Ltd. v. Axis Nirman
& Industries Ltd., 2020 SCC OnLine SC 943], is not restricted
to any particular stage of a winding up proceeding.
(iv) Therefore, what follows as a matter of law is that even
post admission of a winding up petition, and after the
appointment of a Company Liquidator to take over the assets
of a company sought to be wound up, discretion is vested in the
Company Court to transfer such petition to the NCLT. The
question that arises before us in this case is how is such
discretion to be exercised?"
xxx xxx xxx
"31. Given the aforesaid scheme of winding up under Chapter
XX of the Companies Act, 2013, it is clear that several stages
are contemplated, with the Tribunal retaining the power to
control the proceedings in a winding up petition even after it is
admitted. Thus, in a winding up proceeding where the petition
has not been served in terms of Rule 26 of the Companies
(Court) Rules, 1959 at a pre-admission stage, given the
beneficial result of the application of the Code, such winding up
proceeding is compulsorily transferable to the NCLT to be
resolved under the Code. Even post issue of notice and pre
admission, the same result would ensue. However, post
admission of a winding up petition and after the assets of the
company sought to be wound up become in custodia legis and
are taken over by the Company Liquidator, section 290 of the
Companies Act, 2013 would indicate that the Company
Liquidator may carry on the business of the company, so far as
may be necessary, for the beneficial winding up of the
company, and may even sell the company as a going concern.
So long as no actual sales of the immovable or movable
properties have taken place, nothing irreversible is done which
would warrant a Company Court staying its hands on a transfer



          application made to it by a creditor or any party to the
          proceedings. It is only where the winding up proceedings have
          reached a stage where it would be irreversible, making it
          impossible to set the clock back that the Company Court must
          proceed with the winding up, instead of transferring the
          proceedings to the NCLT to now be decided in accordance with
          the provisions of the Code. Whether this stage is reached would
          depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case."

23. A conspectus of the aforesaid authorities would show that a petition

either under Section 7 or Section 9 of the IBC is an independent proceeding

which is unaffected by winding up proceedings that may be filed qua the

same company. Given the object sought to be achieved by the IBC, it is

clear that only where a company in winding up is near corporate death that

no transfer of the winding up proceeding would then take place to the NCLT

to be tried as a proceeding under the IBC. Short of an irresistible conclusion

that corporate death is inevitable, every effort should be made to

resuscitate the corporate debtor in the larger public interest, which includes

not only the workmen of the corporate debtor, but also its creditors and the

goods it produces in the larger interest of the economy of the country. It is,

thus, not possible to accede to the argument on behalf of the Appellant that

given Section 446 of the Companies Act, 1956 / Section 279 of the

Companies Act, 2013, once a winding up petition is admitted, the winding

up petition should trump any subsequent attempt at revival of the company

through a Section 7 or Section 9 petition filed under the IBC. While it is true


that Sections 391 to 393 of the Companies Act, 1956 may, in a given factual

circumstance, be availed of to pull the company out of the red, Section

230(1) of the Companies Act, 2013 is instructive and provides as follows:

        "230. Power to compromise or make arrangements with
        creditors and members.-(1) Where a compromise or
        arrangement is proposed-
                (a) between a company and its creditors or any
                class of them; or
                (b) between a company and its members or any
                class of them,
        the Tribunal may, on the application of the company or of any
        creditor or member of the company, or in the case of a company
        which is being wound up, of the liquidator, appointed under this
        Act or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the
        case may be, order a meeting of the creditors or class of
        creditors, or of the members or class of members, as the case
        may be, to be called, held and conducted in such manner as
        the Tribunal directs.
            Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,
        arrangement includes a reorganisation of the company's share
        capital by the consolidation of shares of different classes or by
        the division of shares into shares of different classes, or by both
        of those methods.
        xxx xxx xxx"

What is clear by this Section is that a compromise or arrangement can also

be entered into in an IBC proceeding if liquidation is ordered. However,

what is of importance is that under the Companies Act, it is only winding up

that can be ordered, whereas under the IBC, the primary emphasis is on

revival of the corporate debtor through infusion of a new management.



24. On facts also, in the present case, nothing can be said to have

become irretrievable in the sense mentioned in paragraph 31 of Action

Ispat (supra).


25. It is settled law that a secured creditor stands outside the winding up

and can realise its security dehors winding up proceedings. In M.K.

Ranganathan v. Govt. of Madras, (1955) 2 SCR 374, this Court held:

        "The position of a secured creditor in the winding up of a
        company has been thus stated by Lord Wrenbury in Food
        Controller v. Cork [1923 Appeal Cases 647]:
                "The phrase 'outside the winding up' is an
                intelligible phrase if used, as it often is, with
                reference to a secured creditor, say a mortgagee.
                The mortgagee of a company in liquidation is in a
                position to say "the mortgaged property is to the
                extent of the mortgage my property. It is immaterial
                to me whether my mortgage is in winding up or not.
                I remain outside the winding up" and shall enforce
                my rights as mortgagee. This is to be contrasted
                with the case in which such a creditor prefers to
                assert his right, not as a mortgagee, but as a
                creditor. He may say 'I will prove in respect of my
                debt'. If so, he comes into the winding up".
        It is also summarised in Palmer's Company Precedents Vol. II,
        page 415:
                "Sometimes the mortgagee sells, with or without the
                concurrence of the liquidator, in exercise of a power
                of sale vested in him by the mortgage. It is not
                necessary to obtain liberty to exercise the power of
                sale, although orders giving such liberty have
                sometimes been made".
        The secured creditor is thus outside the winding up and can
        realise his security without the leave of the winding up Court,



        though if he files a suit or takes other legal proceedings for the
        realisation of his security he is bound under Section 231
        (corresponding with Section 171 of the Indian Companies Act)
        to obtain the leave of, the winding up Court before he can do
        so although such leave would almost automatically be granted.
        Section 231 has been read together with Section 228(1) and
        the attachment, sequestration, distress or execution referred to
        in the latter have reference to proceedings taken through the
        Court and if the creditor has resort to those proceedings he
        cannot put them in force against the estate or effects of the
        Company after the commencement of the winding up without
        the leave of the winding up Court. The provisions in Section 317
        are also supplementary to the provisions of Section 231 and
        emphasise the position of the secured creditor as one outside
        the winding up, the secured creditor being, in regard to the
        exercise of those rights and privileges, in the same position as
        he would be under the Bankruptcy Act.
        The corresponding provisions of the Indian Companies Act
        have been almost bodily incorporated from those of the English
        Companies Act and if there was nothing more, the position of
        the secured creditor here also would be the same as that
        obtaining in England and he would also be outside the winding
        up and a sale by him without the intervention of the Court would
        be valid and could not be challenged as void under Section
        232(1), Indian Companies Act."
                                                                    (at pages 383, 384)

This principle has been followed in Central Bank of India v. Elmot

Engineering Co., (1994) 4 SCC 159 (at paragraph 14), Industrial Credit

and Investment Corpn. of India Ltd. v. Srinivas Agencies, (1996) 4 SCC

165 (at paragraph 2), and Board of Trustees, Port of Mumbai v. Indian

Oil Corpn., (1998) 4 SCC 302 (at paragraph 12).





26. Indiabulls, a secured creditor of the corporate debtor, viz. SRUIL,

has, in enforcement of its debt by a mortgage, sold the mortgaged property

outside the winding up. The aforesaid sale is the subject matter of

proceedings in the Bombay High Court filed by the provisional liquidator. If

the aforesaid sale is set aside, the asset of SRUIL that has been sold will

come back to the provisional liquidator for the purposes of winding up. If

the sale is upheld, equally, there are other assets of SRUIL which continue

to be in the hands of the provisional liquidator for the purposes of winding

up. We may also add that on the facts of this case, though no application

for transfer of the winding up proceeding pending in the Bombay High Court

has been filed, the Bombay High Court has itself, by the orders dated

28.11.2019 and 23.01.2020, directed the provisional liquidator to hand over

the records and assets of SRUIL to the IRP in the Section 7 proceeding

that is pending before the NCLT. No doubt, this has not yet been done as

the IRP has not yet been able to pay the requisite amount to the provisional

liquidator for his expenses.


27. Dr. Singhvi and Shri Ranjit Kumar have vehemently argued that SREI

has suppressed the winding up proceeding in its application under Section

7 of the IBC before the NCLT and has resorted to Section 7 only as a

subterfuge to avoid moving a transfer application before the High Court in



the pending winding up proceeding. These arguments do not avail the

Appellant for the simple reason that Section 7 is an independent

proceeding, as has been held in catena of judgments of this Court, which

has to be tried on its own merits. Any "suppression" of the winding up

proceeding would, therefore, not be of any effect in deciding a Section 7

petition on the basis of the provisions contained in the IBC. Equally, it

cannot be said that any subterfuge has been availed of for the same reason

that Section 7 is an independent proceeding that stands by itself. As has

been correctly pointed out by Shri Sinha, a discretionary jurisdiction under

the fifth proviso to Section 434(1)(c) of the Companies Act, 2013 cannot

prevail over the undoubted jurisdiction of the NCLT under the IBC once the

parameters of Section 7 and other provisions of the IBC have been met.

For all these reasons, therefore, the appeal is dismissed and the interim

order that has been passed by this Court on 18.12.2020 shall stand

immediately vacated.



                                                                               ............................................J.
                                                                             [ ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN ]


                                                                               ............................................J.
                                                                                                             [ B.R. GAVAI ]
New Delhi;
March 01, 2021.



