                                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 202 OF 2012

       GOVERNMENT OF KERALA & ANR. ...APPELLANTS

                                                   VERSUS

       MOTHER SUPERIOR ADORATION CONVENT ...RESPONDENT

                                                      WITH

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6589 OF 2015

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10298 OF 2016

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10297 OF 2016

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10881 OF 2016

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 203 OF 2012

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 204 OF 2012

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 207 OF 2012

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 206 OF 2012

Signature Not Verified CIVIL APPEAL NO. 205 OF 2012
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2021.06.07
09:57:13 IST
Reason:

                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 745 OF 2021
                (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.905 OF 2012)

                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5036 OF 2015

                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8351 OF 2014

                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 746 OF 2021
              (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.12235 OF 2014)

                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 747 OF 2021
              (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.13874 OF 2014)

                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8352 OF 2014

                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4445 OF 2015

                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4446 OF 2015

                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4447 OF 2015

                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7368 OF 2016

                                         J U D G M E N T

R.F. Nariman, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. All these appeals pertain to an exemption provision contained

        in the Kerala Building Tax Act, 1975. Under Section 3(1)(b) buildings

that are used principally for religious, charitable or educational

purposes or as factories or workshops are exempted from building

tax under the Act. All of the appeals, except one, are by the State of

Kerala against a judgment dated 22.11.2007 passed by a Division

Bench of the Kerala High Court in Government of Kerala & Anr v.

Mother Superior Adoration Convent (Civil Appeal No.202 of 2012)

and a Full Bench judgment in State of Kerala & Ors v. Unity Hospital

(P) Ltd. (Civil Appeal No. 207 of 2012), being a judgment dated

21.12.2010. Both judgments decided to exempt the buildings in

question. The other appeals by the State contain judgments which

follow either or both of these judgments. The only appeal by an

assessee namely, Administrator, Jos Giri Hospital v. Government of

Kerala (Civil Appeal No.204 of 2012), is from a judgment of the

Division Bench of the Kerala High Court deciding the case in favour

of the State. However, this judgment was referred to the Full Bench

which decided the judgment in State of Kerala & Ors v. Unity

Hospital (P) Ltd. (Civil Appeal No. 207 of 2012) and has been stated

to have reached an incorrect conclusion.

3. On facts, there is a similarity in most of the cases before us.

        Either there are residential accommodations for nuns as in the first

        appeal before us or there are hostel accommodations which are

        attached to various educational institutions. In both cases, the State

        claims that no exemption should be granted as residential

        accommodation for nuns and hostels for students would be for

        residential as apart from religious or educational purposes and

        would not therefore be covered by the exemption contained in

        Section 3(1)(b) of the Act.

4. We may take up the facts in Civil Appeal No.202 of 2012. In

        this case, by an order of assessment dated 14.03.2002, building tax

        was levied on residential accommodation for nuns who underwent

        religious training to become nuns in a convent. Against the

        aforesaid assessment to tax, the respondent filed O.P. No.11246 of

        2002 and the High court vide its judgment and order dated

        29.5.2002 quashed the aforesaid assessment order and directed the

        Tehsildar to refer the case to the Government for its decision. A

        representation was made to the Government by the respondent on

        10.2.2004 in which it was stated:

"2. At present we the 8 sisters residing here are
deputed to render services in religious as well as
charitable needs of the Vinjan Matha Church, East
Thodupuzha and the people around the Church,
irrespective of caste, creed and community.
xxx xxx xxx

In order to become sisters, we had undergone 8
years rigorous religious education and training and
then decided to lead a life of a SANYASINI
throughout our life.
xxx xxx xxx

8. The vow of obedience, is intended to make use of
the individual sisters by their elected superior
sisters, where their services are most needed. It
means, we the present sisters attached to this
convent at present are not permanent members
here. We have come from different places, and each
one of us will be individually transferred to other
places, as our Superior's Council decides.

9. So much so, the convent is a permanent set up
here to render the religious and charitable needs of
the locality, whereas the members are individually
deputed to render the services for a period found
proper.
xxx xxx xxx

11. The convent was established by the Council
decision of the St. Mary's Province of the
Congregation of the Sisters of Adoration of the
Blessed Sacrament.

12. The building is also intended for accommodating
the junior sisters who are undergoing their college
education in the nearby Newman College -

                Thodupuzha. Thus, at present 8 students-sisters
                also are residing here.

                13. The Building is two storeyed and measures
                approximately 5000sq.ft. The ground floor contains a
                prayer hall, kitchen, refectory, study hall and small
                rooms for sisters. The upper floor contains 5 rooms
                for sisters, a dormitory and study hall.

                14. The building is not at all given for amount at any
                time, and it will not be given so in the future also. It
                will be used only as a religious house."

5. This representation was turned down by the Government's

        order dated 11.09.2006 as follows:

                "The Government has examined the matter in detail.
                The petitioner was heard on 16.9.2004 and he
                claimed that the building is exclusively used for
                accommodating the nuns who are engaged in
                religious and charitable activities. No part of the
                building is rented out or used for any other purpose.
                On perusal of the records the documents produced
                at the time of hearing it has become evident that the
                convent is not principally used for any religious or
                charitable purpose. The District Collector, Idukki as
                per letter read as fourth paper above has also
                informed that no charitable activities are undertaken
                in the convent and the building is used for the
                residential purpose of nuns.
                xxx xxx xxx
                It includes professing once used in public expressing
                it by private and public worship, practicing rituals
                and ceremonies. It also includes observances,
                ceremonies and functions which are being
                customarily performed by members of a particular
                religion. If the main use of the major portion of a

                building is for the above then that building can be
                said to be used principally for religious purposes.
                xxx xxx xxx
                In the above circumstances, Government Order that
                the building in Survey No. 206 Thodupuzha village,
                Thodupuzha Taluk having plinth area of 903.24 M2
                owned by the Adoration Convent, Shanti Bhavan,
                Thodupuzha is not eligible for exemption under
                Section 3 of the Kerala Building Tax Act, 1975."

6. A writ petition being Writ Petition No.27108 of 2006 was filed

        against the said order before a learned Single Judge who then

        referred the matter to a Division Bench as he did not agree with an

        earlier judgment of a learned Single Judge of the Kerala High Court.

        By the impugned judgment dated 22.11.2007, a Division Bench of

        the Kerala High Court held as follows:

                "8. If the activities that are going on in the convent
                are predominantly religious, then, normally, buildings
                of the convent used for the said purpose should also
                qualify for exemption. Of course, if any particular
                building is used for any commercial activity, such
                buildings could be segregated. It is not in dispute
                that a chapel is used for religious purposes.
                Attached to that, there may be a room for the
                Chaplain for taking rest etc. Can that room be
                segregated and said that it is not used for religious
                purposes. We feel that the answer should be in the
                negative. If the buildings of convents are generally
                used for religious purposes and one of the buildings
                is used for residence of an inmate there, it shall also
                be treated as one, used for religious purposes. Any

                interpretation to the contrary will be irrational. So, we
                are of the view that the buildings, used for the
                residence of the nuns in a convent, is principally
                used for religious purposes and therefore, should
                also qualify for exemption. We are in respectful
                agreement with the views expressed by
                C.N. Ramachandran Nair, J., in Writ Petition (C)
                No.27250/06. The judgment in W.A.2424/05 deals
                with the case of a boarding and lodging house for
                students run by a convent where rooms are let out
                collecting a fee. If the convent is running a
                commercial or industrial unit, the building housing
                that establishment will not qualify for exemption.
                That principle cannot be applied in the case of the
                building used for accommodating nuns in the
                convent. The decision of the Apex Court relied on by
                the learned Government Pleader also does not have
                any application to the facts of this case. The point
                considered therein was whether the building used
                for accommodating a school can be treated as a
                building used for charitable purposes or religious
                activities. The principle stated therein does not have
                any application to the facts of this case."

7. The Full Bench judgment of 2010 contained in Civil Appeal

        No.207 of 2012 was as a result of a Division Bench doubting the

        correctness of the Division Bench judgment in Administrator, Jos Giri

        Hospital v. Government of Kerala that is contained in Civil Appeal

        No.204 of 2012. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Full Bench posed the

        question raised thus:

                "2. The question raised is whether hostel building of
                an educational institution is entitled for exemption

        from building tax under Section 3(1)(b) of the Kerala
        Building Tax Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the
        Act for short), which provides for building tax
        exemption for buildings used for "educational
        purposes".

        3. While the building involved in Writ Appeal
        No.1648/2009 is a hostel building owned by a
        nursing school, the building involved in Writ Appeal
        No.2495/2009 is a hostel building attached to a
        Residential Higher Secondary School owned by a
        private management."

The Full Bench held:

        "6. The short question that arises for consideration is
        whether "educational purposes" referred to in the
        above Section has only a restricted meaning
        covering buildings, where students are imparted
        education; or whether it has a wider meaning
        covering hostel buildings owned by educational
        institutions to provide accommodation to students in
        the premises of the educational institutions. The
        Division Bench of this Court in the above referred
        judgment held that "educational purposes" cover
        only purposes which have integral, immediate and
        proximate connection to education. In the reference
        order, another Division Bench of which one of us is a
        member [CNR(J)], took the view that the above test
        laid down by the other Division Bench in the earlier
        judgment is satisfied at least in respect of hostels
        run by nursing schools and medical educational
        institutions and probably mistake is there only in the
        conclusion drawn in that judgment. What we notice
        is that the Division Bench while deciding the matter
        did not consider the educational Regulations of the
        Medical Council of India and Nursing Council of
        India, which make it mandatory that in order to get
        approval for a medical college or a nursing college,

hospital for patients and hostel facilities for students
are mandatory. The State also does not controvert
this position and in fact all the medical colleges and
nursing colleges run in the State including those run
by the Government have hospitals of their own or
attached hospitals, and have hostels providing
accommodation to all students. Except probably few
students who hail from the areas very close to the
colleges, all the nursing and medical students reside
in the hostels attached to their colleges. The
students of both medical and nursing colleges
require clinical training in hospitals, and students in
senior classes are deployed on a turn basis in
hospitals. Unless accommodation is provided to the
students in the college campus or nearby, it would
not be possible for them, particularly for girls, to
reach the hospitals attached to the medical and
nursing colleges for duty at odd hours in the night.
Therefore, the Medical Council of India and Nursing
Council of India have made it mandatory for every
medical college and nursing college to have hostel
facilities, and without such facility no medical or
nursing college will get approval from the Medical
Council or Nursing Council of India, and only on their
approval, the medical educational institution can get
affiliation to the University. So much so, in our view,
the test laid down by the Division Bench i.e. integral,
immediate and proximate connection of the hostel
building with education, is squarely satisfied in the
cases of hostels attached to nursing schools and
other medical educational institutions which require
compulsory hostel facility for students for their
approval. We, therefore, hold that wherever hostel is
compulsory for approval of a course study or an
educational institution by the regulatory body as in
the case of medical and nursing colleges, hostel
building is an integral part of the educational
institution, and so much so, accommodation to
students provided in the hostel building is for

educational purpose and therefore the hostel
building qualifies for exemption from building tax. In
view of the above finding, we are unable to agree
with the conclusion drawn by the Division Bench i.e.
denial of exemption to hostel building attached to the
nursing school.

7. The next question to be considered is whether
hostel facility to students provided by other
educational institutions, which are not compulsorily
required under the educational regulations to
provide accommodation to students, is an
educational purpose qualifying the hostel buildings
for tax exemption. In this context, we have to
necessarily consider the object and scope of the
exemption clause provided in the statute. While
learned counsel for the appellants have relied on
Section 235 of the Kerala Municipalities Act, which
provides for exemption to buildings used for
educational purposes including hostel buildings
owned by the same educational institutions, learned
Government Pleader has relied on the decision of
the Supreme Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi
v. Children Book Trust, reported in AIR 1992 SC
1456, where the Supreme Court held that school
buildings are not entitled to exemption from
municipal tax under the Delhi Municipal Corporation
Act. On going through the judgment of the Supreme
Court, we notice that the provision for exemption
from property tax under the Delhi Municipal
Corporation Act is not similar to the provisions of the
Kerala Building Tax Act, and so much so, in our view,
the decision cannot be applied while deciding the
claim of exemption made by the appellants in these
cases. Even though Section 235 of the Kerala
Municipalities Act specifically provides for property
tax exemption for hostel buildings owned by the very
same educational institutions, there is no specific
exemption for hostel buildings in Section 3 (1)(b) of

the Kerala Building Tax Act. Therefore, we have to
examine whether "educational purposes" referred to
in Section 3(1)(b) has only restricted meaning or it
has a wider meaning covering all buildings directly
or indirectly catering to the needs of student
community. In this context, we have to necessarily
consider the general pattern of hostel facility
provided by education institutions in the State. In the
recent past, large number of educational institutions,
particularly engineering colleges are established all
over Kerala including remote areas and hill stations,
where the students admitted are not from local area
and they have to necessarily depend on hostel
facility to be provided by the educational institution.
In fact admissions to medical and engineering
colleges are given on central allotment basis and
hardly any student can get admission in a college
near to his/her house. Therefore, necessarily, the
students have to depend on hostel accommodation
to pursue their studies. Colleges will not get students
if they do not provide hostel accommodation to
students near to the College. Therefore, hostel
buildings are constructed by educational institutions
to attract students to their institutions. Many
educational institutions provide only basic facilities
like building, electricity and water connections for
hostels and in fact, students are running mess on
sharing basis. So much so, the State's contention
that hostels attached to educational institutions are
commercial ventures intended to make profit, in our
view, is unacceptable. In order to consider whether
hostel provided by an educational institution is for
educational purpose or not, we have to consider the
consequences if such educational institution does
not have hostel facility to provide accommodation to
its students. Obviously, such educational institutions
have to source students locally, which may be
possible only in the case of Schools. In fact,
thousands of schools and colleges in the State do

not have hostel facility because they depend on
students from the local area only. However,
wherever an educational institution has students
from different parts of the State, and Non Resident
Indians sending their children for studies in Kerala,
necessarily the educational institution has to provide
hostel facility to the students. In fact, without hostel
facility, many educational institutions will not have
required number of students to run it. We, therefore,
feel accommodation is a necessary facility, which an
educational institution is required to provide to it's
students; and so long as the purpose of stay of
students in the hostel is to study in the educational
institution, the purpose of such building, which is
used for accommodation of students, qualifies as
educational purpose.
xxx

9. We are therefore of the view that buildings owned
by educational institutions for providing hostel
accommodation to students qualify for building tax
exemption under clause (b) of Section 3(1) of the
Act. However all buildings accommodating students
do not qualify for building tax exemption because
there are so many lodge buildings constructed by
various people around educational institutions which
do not have hostel facility, to rent out to students in
such educational institutions. Letting out of buildings
by private agencies is a commercial activity whether
tenants are students or not. In other words, only
hostel buildings owned by educational institutions for
accommodating it's own students in such hostels will
qualify for exemption under clause (b) of Section
3(1) the Act."

8. Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned senior advocate appearing on

           behalf of the State of Kerala, assailed the correctness of these

           judgments. According to him, an exemption provision contained in a

           fiscal statute must be construed strictly and in the case of doubt or

           ambiguity must be construed in favour of the State. For this

           proposition, he cited a number of judgments. He then analysed

           Section 3(1)(b) of the Act and argued that a building used principally

           for religious or educational purposes can only be a building that is

           used for religious/educational activity and not for activity which has

           no direct connection with religious/educational activity, such as

           residential quarters for nuns, priests or hostel accommodation for

           students. He argued that even assuming that there is ambiguity in

           Section 3(1)(b), in that a purpose connected with the

           religious/educational activity may be included, yet the ambiguity has

           to be resolved in favour of the State and this being so, on this short

           ground, the judgment of the Division Bench and the judgment of the

           Full Bench are incorrect. He further went on to argue that the term

           "building" has been defined in Section 2(e) of the Act as meaning a

           separate house, out-house, etc. and that in the present case as no

           religious/educational activities are carried on at all in the buildings

        which house nuns and hostel accommodation which houses

        students, such buildings, not being principally used for religious

        purposes, cannot possibly be exempt under the Act.

9. Learned counsel for the respondents supported the judgment

        of the Division Bench and the Full Bench, arguing that on facts, a

        beneficial legislation which is meant to further religious, charitable

        and educational purposes should not be construed in a narrow

        fashion, and should be construed in accordance with the object

        sought to be achieved, and this being the case, the aforesaid

        judgments do not require to be disturbed.

10. Having heard learned counsel appearing for all parties, we

        must first set out the relevant provisions of the Kerala Building Tax

        Act, 1975:

                "2. Definitions - In this Act, unless the context
                otherwise requires,

                (e) "building" means a house, out-house, garage, or
                any other structure, or part thereof, whether of
                masonry, bricks, wood, metal or other material, but
                does not include any portable shelter or any shed
                constructed principally of mud, bamboos, leaves,
                grass or thatch or a latrine which is not attached to
                the main structure.

(i) "owner" includes a person who for the time being
is receiving, or is entitled to receive, the rent of any
building, whether on his own account or on account
of himself and others or as an agent, trustee,
guardian or receiver for any other person or who
should so received the rent or be entitled to receive
it if the building or part thereof were let to a tenant;

(l) "residential building" means a building or any
other structure or part thereof built exclusively for
residential purpose including outhouses or garages
appurtenant to the building for the more beneficial
enjoyment of the main building but does not include
hotels, boarding places, lodges and the like.]
3. Exemptions - (1) Nothing in this Act shall apply
to-

(a) buildings owned by the Government of Kerala or
the Government of India or any local authority; and

(b) buildings used principally for religious, charitable
or educational purposes or as factories or
workshops.

Explanation. - For the purposes of this sub-section,
"charitable purpose" includes relief of the poor and
free medical relief.
5. Charge of building tax - (1) Subject to the other
provisions contained in this Act, there shall be
charged a tax (hereinafter referred to as "building
tax") based on the plinth area at the rate specified in
the Schedule on every building the construction of
which is completed on or after the appointed day.
5A. Charge of luxury tax - [1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, there shall be
charged a luxury tax based on the plinth area at the
rate specified in Schedule II, annually on all

                      residential buildings having a plinth area of 278.7
                      square metres completed on or after the 1st day of
                      April, 1999."

11. Before coming to the case law that has been cited before us, it

           is important to first analyse Section 3(1)(b) with which we are

           directly concerned. First and foremost, the subject matter is

           "buildings" which as defined, would include a house or other

           structure. Secondly, the exemption is based upon user and not

           ownership. Third, what is important is the expression "principally",

           showing thereby that the legislature decided to grant this exemption

           qua buildings which are "principally" and not exclusively used for the

           purposes mentioned therein. Dominant object therefore is the test to

           be applied to see whether such building is or is not exempt.

           Fourthly, religious, charitable or educational purposes are

           earmarked by the legislature as qualifying for the exemption as they

           do not pertain to business or commercial activity. Fifthly, what is

           important is that even factories or workshops which produce goods

           and provide services are also exempt, despite profit motive, as the

           legislature obviously wishes to boost production in factories and

           services in workshops. What is important to note is that the

        expression "used principally for" is wider than the expression "as"

        which precedes the words "factories or workshops".

12. A reading of the provision would show that the object for

        exempting buildings which are used principally for religious,

        charitable or educational purposes would be for core religious,

        charitable or educational activity as well as purposes directly

        connected with religious activity. One example will suffice to show

        the difference between a purpose that is directly connected with

        religious or educational activity and a purpose which is only

        indirectly connected with such activity. Take a case where, unlike

        the facts in Civil Appeal No. 202 of 2012, nuns are not residing in a

        building next to a convent so that they may walk over to the convent

        for religious instruction. Take a case where the neighbouring building

        to the convent is let out on rent to any member of the public, and the

        rent is then utilised only for core religious activity. Can it be said that

        the letting out at market rent would be connected with religious

        activity because the rental that is received is ploughed back only into

        religious activity? Letting out a building for a commercial purpose

        would lose any rational connection with religious activity. The indirect

        connection with religious activity being the profits which are

        ploughed back into religious activity would obviously not suffice to

        exempt such a building. But if on the other hand, nuns are living in a

        neighbouring building to a convent only so that they may receive

        religious instruction there, or if students are living in a hostel close to

        the school or college in which they are imparted instruction, it is

        obvious that the purpose of such residence is not to earn profit but

        residence that is integrally connected with religious or educational

        activity.

13. A reading of the other provisions of the Act strengthens the

        aforesaid conclusion. "Residential building" is defined separately

        from "building" in Section 2(l). A "residential building" means a

        building or any other structure or part thereof built exclusively for

        residential purpose. It is important to note that "residential building"

        is not the subject matter of exemption under Section 3 of the Act.

        Quite the contrary is to be found in Section 5A of the Act, which

        starts with a non-obstante clause, and which states that a luxury tax

        is to be charged on all residential buildings having a plinth area of

        278.7 square meters and which have been completed on or after

        1.4.1999. If we were to accept the contention of the State, buildings

        in which nuns are housed and students are accommodated in

        hostels which have been completed after 1.4.1999 and which have a

        plinth area of 278.7 square meters would be liable to pay luxury tax

        as these buildings would now no longer be buildings used principally

        for religious or educational purposes, but would be residential

        buildings used exclusively for residential purposes. This would turn

        the object sought to be achieved in exempting such buildings on its

        head. For this reason also, we cannot countenance a plea by the

        State that buildings which are used for purposes integrally

        connected with religious or educational activity are yet outside the

        scope of the exemption contained in Section 3(1)(b) of the Act. We

        may now examine the case law.

14. In Union of India v. Wood Papers Ltd (1990) 4 SCC 256 the

        rule as to exemption notifications in tax statutes was felicitously laid

        down as follows:

                "4. Entitlement of exemption depends on
                construction of the expression "any factory
                commencing production" used in the Table extracted
                above. Literally exemption is freedom from liability,
                tax or duty. Fiscally it may assume varying shapes,
                specially, in a growing economy. For instance tax

                holiday to new units, concessional rate of tax to
                goods or persons for limited period or with the
                specific objective etc. That is why its construction,
                unlike charging provision, has to be tested on
                different touchstone. In fact an exemption provision
                is like an exception and on normal principle of
                construction or interpretation of statutes it is
                construed strictly either because of legislative
                intention or on economic justification of inequitable
                burden or progressive approach of fiscal provisions
                intended to augment State revenue. But once
                exception or exemption becomes applicable no rule
                or principle requires it to be construed strictly. Truly
                speaking liberal and strict construction of an
                exemption provision are to be invoked at different
                stages of interpreting it. When the question is
                whether a subject falls in the notification or in the
                exemption clause then it being in nature of exception
                is to be construed strictly and against the subject but
                once ambiguity or doubt about applicability is lifted
                and the subject falls in the notification then full play
                should be given to it and it calls for a wider and
                liberal construction. Therefore, the first exercise that
                has to be undertaken is if the production of packing
                and wrapping material in the factory as it existed
                prior to 1964 is covered in the notification."

15. This statement of the law was followed in a number of

        judgments. Suffice it to say that in Star Industries v. Commr. of
        Customs (Imports) (2016) 2 SCC 362, a large number of

        judgments are referred to for the same proposition (see paragraphs

        32 to 34).

16. However, there is another line of authority which states that

        even in tax statutes, an exemption provision should be liberally

        construed in accordance with the object sought to be achieved if

        such provision is to grant incentive for promoting economic growth

        or otherwise has some beneficial reason behind it. In such cases,

        the rationale of the judgments following Wood Papers (supra) does

        not apply. In fact, the legislative intent is not to burden the subject

        with tax so that some specific public interest is furthered. Thus, in

        CST v. Industrial Coal Enterprises (1999) 2 SCC 607, this Court

        held:

                "11. In CIT v. Straw Board Mfg. Co. Ltd. 1989 Supp
                (2) SCC 523 this Court held that in taxing statutes,
                provision for concessional rate of tax should be
                liberally construed. So also in Bajaj Tempo Ltd. v.
                CIT (1992) 3 SCC 78 it was held that provision
                granting incentive for promoting economic growth
                and development in taxing statutes should be
                liberally construed and restriction placed on it by
                way of exception should be construed in a
                reasonable and purposive manner so as to advance
                the objective of the provision.

                12. We find that the object of granting exemption
                from payment of sales tax has always been for
                encouraging capital investment and establishment of
                industrial units for the purpose of increasing
                production of goods and promoting the development
                of industry in the State. If the test laid down in Bajaj

                Tempo Ltd. case (1992) 3 SCC 78 is applied, there
                is no doubt whatever that the exemption granted to
                the respondent from 9-8-1985 when it fulfilled all the
                prescribed conditions will not cease to operate just
                because the capital investment exceeded the limit of
                Rs 3 lakhs on account of the respondent becoming
                the owner of land and building to which the unit was
                shifted. If the construction sought to be placed by
                the appellant is accepted, the very purpose and
                object of the grant of exemption will be defeated.
                After all, the respondent had only shifted the unit to
                its own premises which made it much more
                convenient and easier for the respondent to carry on
                the production of the goods undisturbed by the
                vagaries of the lessor and without any necessity to
                spend a part of its income on rent. It is not the case
                of the appellant that there were any mala fides on
                the part of the respondent in obtaining exemption in
                the first instance as a unit with a capital investment
                below Rs 3 lakhs and increasing the capital
                investment subsequently to an amount exceeding
                Rs 3 lakhs with a view to defeat the provisions of
                any of the relevant statutes. The bona fides of the
                respondent have never been questioned by the
                appellant."

17. Likewise, in State of Jharkhand v. Tata Cummins Ltd (2006)

        4 SCC 57 in dealing with a tax exemption for setting up an industry

        in a backward area, this Court held as follows:

                "16. Before analysing the above policy read with the
                notifications, it is important to bear in mind the
                connotation of the word "tax". A tax is a payment for
                raising general revenue. It is a burden. It is based on
                the principle of ability or capacity to pay. It is a
                manifestation of the taxing power of the State. An

                exemption from payment of tax under an enactment
                is an exemption from the tax liability. Therefore,
                every such exemption notification has to be read
                strictly. However, when an assessee is promised
                with a tax exemption for setting up an industry in the
                backward area as a term of the industrial policy, we
                have to read the implementing notifications in the
                context of the industrial policy. In such a case, the
                exemption notifications have to be read liberally
                keeping in mind the objects envisaged by the
                industrial policy and not in a strict sense as in the
                case of exemptions from tax liability under the taxing
                statute."

18. Similarly, in Pondicherry State Coop. Consumer Federation
        Ltd. v. Union Territory of Pondicherry (2008) 1 SCC 206 this

        Court held:

                "5. Learned Senior Counsel Shri Venkatraman
                appearing for the appellant assessee submitted that
                this question was no more res integra and was
                covered by the judgment of this Court in Vadilal
                Chemicals Ltd. v. State of A.P. (2005) 6 SCC 292. It
                was pointed out that in that case an identical
                question fell for consideration under the similar
                circumstances. There also, the question was as to
                whether the small-scale industry which was engaged
                in bottling of anhydrous ammonia could be said to
                be entitled to the exemption from payment of sales
                tax on the ground that it was manufacturing such
                goods since there was a general exemption offered
                by the Andhra Pradesh Government by GOMs No.
                117 dated 17-3-1993 to the small-scale industry.
                There also it was found on inspection that the

assessee industry was allowed irregular tax
exemption on the first sales of anhydrous liquefied
ammonia as it was found that the commodity that
was purchased and sold was one of the same and
there was no new commodity that had emerged and
that the assessee had only done bottling of
ammonia. The show-cause notices were issued to
the assessee in that case suggesting therein that the
activity of bottling/packing of gases into unit
containers from bulk quantities was not recognised
as "manufacture" even under the Central Excise Act.
In that view the question which fell for consideration
before this Court was as to whether under the
circumstances the assessee could claim the
exemption. This Court firstly held that the exemption
certificate was granted by the authorities after due
consideration. It was then noted that though the
exemption was available on the products
"manufactured" in industrial units, the interpretation
put forth by the authorities on the word
"manufacture" was incorrect. This Court took the
view that the authorities had based the interpretation
of word "manufacture" on the law relating to excise
and that it was erroneous to do so. It was observed
that in the State Sales Tax Act there was no
provision relating to "manufacture" and the concept
was to be found only in the 1993 G.O. which had
provided the exemption. The Court further took the
view that the exemption was granted with a view to
give a fillip to the industry in the State and also for
the industrial units of the State. The Court, therefore,
took the view that a liberal interpretation of the term
"manufacture" should have been adopted by the
State authorities, more particularly, when the State
authorities had granted the certificate of eligibility
after due consideration of the facts.

6. In our view the law laid down in this decision is
applicable to the present case on all fours. Here also

the authorities had firstly certified the assessee's
industry to be small-scale industry and had then
proceeded to grant exemption to it from payment of
sales tax on the goods manufactured. The said
certificate was not found to have been erroneously
issued and was very much in vogue when the show-
cause notices came to be served on the assessee.
The G.O. providing exemption clearly suggested that
such exemption was given in the public interest.
Therefore, it is obvious that the decision in Vadilal
Chemicals case (2005) 6 SCC 292 would be equally
applicable as even in that case what the industry did
was to bottle the ammonia gas purchased in bulk. In
the present case it is palmolive oil which is
purchased in bulk and is repacked so as to facilitate
its sale in the retail market.

7. Shri T.L.V. Iyer, Senior Advocate appearing on
behalf of the Union Territory of Pondicherry,
however, tried to suggest that the exemption from
payment of tax granted on 19-5-1989 was granted
by the Director of Industries and it was clear from
that exemption that it was only on the basis of
GOMs No. 15/74 dated 25-6-1974. Our attention
was invited to the last lines of the aforementioned
G.O. dated 19-5-1989. The last portion is as under:

      "The unit is exempted from payment of sales
      tax for five years vide GOMs No.
      15/74/FIN(CT) dated 25-6-1974."

On this the learned Senior Counsel argued that,
therefore, it had to be proved that the goods were
manufactured by the assessee and in the present
case since the palmolive oil did not change its
character on its being repacked by the assessee, it
could not be said that the assessee had
manufactured any goods. Learned counsel also
urges that in the absence of any definition of

"manufactured goods" in the Sales Tax Act, we
would have to fall back upon either the dictionary
meaning of the term or to borrow it from the Central
Excise Act. We are afraid, the contention cannot be
accepted in the wake of clear law laid down by this
Court in Vadilal Chemicals case (2005) 6 SCC 292.
We have already shown as to how the decision in
that case is applicable to the present situation. In
that view we are of the clear opinion that since in the
present case the exemption was granted to all small-
scale industrial units registered with the Director of
Industries and since the assessee was recognised
and certified as a small industrial unit, engaged in
the activity of repacking of edible oil and further
since the exemption was granted with the open eyes
to this particular industry, the State cannot be
allowed to turn around and take a stance that the
appellant assessee was not entitled to the
exemption on the ground that it did not manufacture
any goods. We are in respectful agreement with the
view taken in Vadilal Chemicals case (2005) 6 SCC
292 which is more particularly reflected in paras 19
and 20 of that decision where this Court observed as
under: (SCC p. 298, para 20)

    "20. In this case the State Sales Tax Act
    contains no provision relating to 'manufacture'.
    The concept only finds place in the 1993 G.O.
    issued by the Department of Commerce and
    Industries. It appears from the context of the
    other provisions of the 1993 G.O. that the word
    'manufacture' had been used to exclude
    dealers who merely purchased the goods and
    resold the same on retail price. What the State
    Government wanted was investment and
    industrial activity. It is in this background that
    the 1993 G.O. must be interpreted. (See CST v.
    Industrial Coal Enterprises (1999) 2 SCC 607).
    The exemption was granted in terms of the

                    1993 G.O. the thrust of which was to increase
                    industrial development in the State."

                8. We respectfully agree with the aforesaid
                observations and would choose to take the same
                view by accepting the contention of the appellant
                that a liberal view of GOMs No. 15/74 dated 25-6-
                1974 would have to be taken. We accordingly allow
                the appeal, set aside the order passed by the High
                Court and restore that of the Tribunal but without any
                order as to costs."

19. While construing an exemption in a sales tax statute, this

        Court in CST v. Amara Raja Batteries Ltd (2009) 8 SCC 209 held:

                "21. An exemption notification should be given a
                literary (sic literal) meaning. Recourse to other
                principles or canons of interpretation of statute
                should be resorted to only in the event the same
                give rise to anomaly or absurdity. The exemption
                notification must be construed having regard to the
                purpose and object it seeks to achieve. The
                Government sought for increase in industrial
                development in the State. Such a benevolent act on
                the part of the State, unless there exists any
                statutory interdict, should be given full effect. (See
                Vadilal Chemicals Ltd. v. State of A.P. (2005) 6 SCC
                292)"
20. Likewise, even under the Customs Act, this Court in Commr.
        of Customs (Preventive) v. M. Ambalal & Co. (2011) 2 SCC 74

        made a clear distinction between exemptions which are to be strictly

        interpreted as opposed to beneficial exemptions having as their

        purpose - encouragement or promotion of certain activities. This

        case felicitously put the law thus follows:

                "16. It is settled law that the notification has to be
                read as a whole. If any of the conditions laid down in
                the notification is not fulfilled, the party is not entitled
                to the benefit of that notification. The rule regarding
                exemptions is that exemptions should generally be
                strictly interpreted but beneficial exemptions having
                their purpose as encouragement or promotion of
                certain activities should be liberally interpreted. This
                composite rule is not stated in any particular
                judgment in so many words. In fact, majority of
                judgments emphasise that exemptions are to be
                strictly interpreted while some of them insist that
                exemptions in fiscal statutes are to be liberally
                interpreted giving an apparent impression that they
                are contradictory to each other. But this is only
                apparent. A close scrutiny will reveal that there is no
                real contradiction amongst the judgments at all. The
                synthesis of the views is quite clearly that the
                general rule is strict interpretation while special rule
                in the case of beneficial and promotional exemption
                is liberal interpretation. The two go very well with
                each other because they relate to two different sets
                of circumstances."

21. This judgment was followed in CCE v. Favourite Industries

        (2012) 7 SCC 153 (see paragraph 42).

22. A recent 5-Judge Bench judgment was cited by Shri Gupta in

        Commr. of Customs v. Dilip Kumar & Co. (2018) 9 SCC 1. The 5-
        Judge Bench was set up as a 3-Judge Bench in Sun Export

        Corporation v. Collector of Customs 1997 (6) SCC 564 was

        doubted, as the said judgment ruled that an ambiguity in a tax

        exemption provision must be interpreted so as to favour the

        assessee claiming the benefit of such exemption. This Court after

        dealing with a number of judgments relating to exemption provisions

        in tax statutes, ultimately concluded as follows:

                "66. To sum up, we answer the reference holding as
                under:

                66.1. Exemption notification should be interpreted
                strictly; the burden of proving applicability would be
                on the assessee to show that his case comes within
                the parameters of the exemption clause or
                exemption notification.

                66.2. When there is ambiguity in exemption
                notification which is subject to strict interpretation,
                the benefit of such ambiguity cannot be claimed by
                the subject/assessee and it must be interpreted in
                favour of the Revenue.

                66.3. The ratio in Sun Export case [Sun Export
                Corpn. v. Collector of Customs, (1997) 6 SCC 564]
                is not correct and all the decisions which took similar
                view as in Sun Export case stand overruled."

23. It may be noticed that the 5-Judge Bench judgment did not

        refer to the line of authority which made a distinction between

        exemption provisions generally and exemption provisions which

        have a beneficial purpose. We cannot agree with Shri Gupta's

        contention that sub-silentio the line of judgments qua beneficial

        exemptions has been done away with by this 5-Judge Bench. It is

        well settled that a decision is only an authority for what it decides

        and not what may logically follow from it (see Quinn v. Leathem
        [1901] AC 495 as followed in State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Sekhar
        Misra (1968) 2 SCR 154 at 162,163)

24. This being the case, it is obvious that the beneficial purpose of

        the exemption contained in Section 3(1)(b) must be given full effect

        to, the line of authority being applicable to the facts of these cases

        being the line of authority which deals with beneficial exemptions as

        opposed to exemptions generally in tax statutes. This being the

        case, a literal formalistic interpretation of the statute at hand is to be

        eschewed. We must first ask ourselves what is the object sought to

        be achieved by the provision, and construe the statute in accord with

        such object. And on the assumption that any ambiguity arises in

        such construction, such ambiguity must be in favour of that which is

        exempted. Consequently, for the reasons given by us, we agree with

        the conclusions reached by the impugned judgments of the Division

        Bench and the Full Bench.

25. The matter can also be seen from a slightly different angle.

        Where a High Court construes a local statute, ordinarily deference

        must be given to the High Court judgments in interpreting such a

        statute, particularly when they have stood the test of time (see State
        of Gujarat v. Zinabhai Ranchhodji Darji (1972) 1 SCC 233 at
        paragraph 10, Bishamber Dass Kohli v. Satya Bhalla (1993) 1
        SCC 566 at paragraph 11, Duroflex Coir Industries Ltd. v. CST
        1993 Supp (1) SCC 568 at paragraph 2, State of Karnataka v. G.
        Seenappa 1993 Supp (1) SCC 648 at paragraph 3 and Bonam
        Satyavathi v. Addala Raghavulu 1994 Supp (2) SCC 556 at

        paragraph 4). This is all the more applicable in the case of tax

        statutes where persons arrange their affairs on the basis of the legal

        position as it exists.

   26. In the result, the appeals filed by the State of Kerala are

           dismissed. The appeal filed in Civil Appeal No.204 of 2012 is

           allowed and the judgment of the Division Bench is set aside.

                                                                    ...................................J.
                                                                    (R. F. Nariman)

                                                                    ....................................J.
                                                                    (B.R. Gavai)
New Delhi.
March 01, 2021.


