                                                                                               Reportable

                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              Criminal Appeal No.141 of 2021
                                (@ SLP (Crl.) No.103 of 2021)

            PATRICIA MUKHIM .... Appellant
                                                         Versus
            STATE OF MEGHALAYA & ORS. .... Respondent (s)
                                             J U D G M E N T

            L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.

. This Appeal is filed against the rejection of an
            application filed by the Appellant under Section 482 of the
            Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for quashing FIR Laban PS
            Case No.72(7)2020 dated 06.07.2020 registered under
            Sections 153 A, 500 and 505 (1) (c) of the Indian Penal
            Code, 1860.
. A press release was issued by the Assistant Inspector
            General of Police (A) on 04.07.2020 in which there was a
            reference to an incident on the day prior. The incident had
Signature Not Verified led to registration of a crime at Laban Police Station under
Digitally signed by
GEETA AHUJA
Date: 2021.03.25
16:54:35 IST Sections 326/307/506/34 IPC. It was mentioned in the press
Reason:

            release that around 12:30 pm, about 25 unidentified boys

                                                                                                     1 | P a g ehad assaulted youngsters playing basketball in Block 4,
Lawsohtun with iron rods and sticks. Arindam Deb,
Subharashi Das Paspurkayastha, Saptarshi Das Purkayashta,
Binak Deb, Bishal Ghosh and Prittish Deb had sustained
injuries in the incident. The injured had been rushed to
Woodland Hospital for medical assistance. It was stated in
the press release that some suspects had already been
arrested and that interrogation was in progress. An appeal
was made to the public to assist the investigation team in
identifying the perpetrators of the crime. A warning was
given that nobody should breach communal peace and
harmony.
3. On the same day, the Appellant uploaded a post on
Facebook, which reads as follows:
       Patricia Mukhim
       4 July at 04:07. Facebook for Android
       Conrad Sangma CM Meghalaya, what happened yesterday
       at Lawsohtun where some Non-Tribal youth playing
       Basketball were assaulted with lethal weapons and are now
       in Hospital, is unacceptable in a state with a Government
       and a functional Police Force. The attackers allegedly tribal
       boys with masks on and should be immediately booked. This
       continued attack of Non-Tribals in Meghalaya whose
       ancestors have lived here for decades, some having come
       here since the British period is reprehensible to say the
       least. The fact that such attacker and trouble mongers since
       1979 have never been arrested and if arrested never

                                                                                        2 | P a g e penalized according to law suggests that Meghalaya has
       been a failed State for a long time now.
       We request your government and the police force under the
       present DGP, R. Chandranathan, to take this matter with the
       seriousness it deserves. Show us the public that we have a
       police force we can look up to.

       And what about the Dorbar Shnong of the area? Don't they
       have their eyes and ears to the ground? Don't they know the
       criminal elements in their jurisdiction? Should they not lead
       the charge and identify those murderous elements? This is
       the time to rise above community interests, caste and creed
       and call out for justice.

       We hope that this will not be yet another case lost in the
       Police files. We want action. Criminal elements have no
       community. They must be dealt with as per the law of the
       land.

       Why should our Non-Tribal brethren continue to live in
       perpetual fear in their own state? Those born and brought
       up here have as much right to call Meghalaya their State as
       the indigenous Tribal does. Period.

4. On 06.07.2020, the Headman and the Secretary,
Dorbar Shnong, Lawsohtun, Shillong filed a complaint with
the Superintendent of Police, East Khasi Hills, Shillong,
Meghalaya that the statement made by the Appellant on
Facebook incited communal tension which might instigate a
communal conflict. The Dorbar Shnong also complained of

 | P a g edefamation. Acting on the said complaint, FIR was
registered at Laban Police Station and notice was issued to
the Appellant under Section 41 A Cr. PC, directing her to
appear before the Kench's Trace Police Beat House under
Laban Police Station, District East Khasi Hills Shillong,
Meghalaya.
5. The Appellant filed Criminal Petition No. 9 of 2020 in
the High Court of Meghalaya at Shillong for quashing the
FIR. The High Court by its judgment dated 10.11.2020
dismissed the Criminal Petition No. 9 of 2020, the legality of
which is challenged in this Appeal. The High Court was of
the opinion that reference to the attack on the non-tribals in
the State of Meghalaya by the tribals has propensity to
cause a rift between two communities. Observing that the
Facebook post sought to arouse feelings of enmity and
hatred between two communities, the High Court held
 prima facie
                  an offence under Section 153 A IPC was made
out.
6. We have heard Ms. Vrinda Grover, learned counsel for
the Appellant and Mr. Avijit Mani Tripathi, learned counsel
for the State of Meghalaya. The contention of the Appellant
was that ingredients of the offence under Section 153 A IPC
have not been made out and the FIR registered against the

 | P a g eAppellant deserves to be quashed. It was urged on behalf
of the Appellant that the Facebook post should be read in its
entirety. The brutal attack on non-tribals was highlighted
calling for suitable action against the culprits. It was
submitted on behalf of the Appellant that there was no
intention to promote any feeling of enmity or hatred
between two communities. Reliance was placed on
judgments of this Court to argue that the comment made by
the Appellant should be judged from the stand point of a
reasonable, strong minded and courageous man. The
Appellant asserted her right guaranteed under Article 19 (1)
(a) of the Constitution of India. She voiced her concern
about the criminal prosecution resulting in a chilling effect
on her fundamental right to free speech.
7. The learned counsel for the Respondent-State argued
that the Appellant is a renowned journalist and is expected
to be more responsible when making public comments. The
learned counsel for the State submitted that the comment
of the Appellant has the tendency of provoking communal
disharmony. He submitted that the High Court was right in
dismissing the application filed under Section 482 Cr. PC
and requested this Court to not interfere as the
investigation is in progress.

 | P a g e8. " It is of utmost importance to keep all speech free in
 order for the truth to emerge and have a civil society." -
Thomas Jefferson. Freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed by Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution is a very
valuable fundamental right. However, the right is not
absolute. Reasonable restrictions can be placed on the right
of free speech and expression in the interest of sovereignty
and integrity of India, security of the State, friendly relations
with foreign States, public order, decency or morality or in
relation to contempt of Court, defamation or incitement to
an offence. Speech crime is punishable under Section 153 A
IPC. Promotion of enmity between different groups on
grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language
etc. and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony is
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three
years or with fine or with both under Section 153 A. As we
are called upon to decide whether a prima facie
                                                                                 case is
made out against the Appellant for committing offences
under Sections 153 A and 505 (1) (c), it is relevant to
reproduce the provisions which are as follows:
      153A. Promoting enmity between different groups on
      grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence,
      language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to
      maintenance of harmony. -

 | P a g e(1) Whoever-
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by
visible representations or otherwise, promotes or attempts
to promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth,
residence, language, caste or community or any other
ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity,
hatred or ill-will between different religious, racial, language
or regional groups or castes or communities, or
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance
of harmony between different religious, racial, language or
regional groups or castes or communities, and which
disturbs or is likely to disturb the public tranquility, or
(c) organizes any exercise, movement, drill or other similar
activity intending that the participants in such activity shall
use or be trained to use criminal force or violence or
knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity
will use or be trained to use criminal force or violence, or
participates in such activity intending to use or be trained to
use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely that
the participants in such activity will use or be trained to use
criminal force or violence, against any religious, racial,
language or regional group or caste or community and such
activity for any reason whatsoever causes or is likely to
cause fear or alarm or a feeling of insecurity amongst
members of such religious, racial, language or regional
group or caste or community, shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both.
Offence committed in place of worship, etc.- (2)
Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in
any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the
performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies,

 | P a g e shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to
      five years and shall also be liable to fine.
      505. Statements conducing to public mischief. -
      (1) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement,
      rumour or report, -
      *** *** *** ***
      (c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class
      or community of persons to commit any offence against any
      other class or community,
      shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to
      three years, or with fine, or with both.

9. Only where the written or spoken words have the
tendency of creating public disorder or disturbance of law
and order or affecting public tranquility, the law needs to
step in to prevent such an activity. The intention to cause
disorder or incite people to violence is the sine qua non
                                                                                         of
the offence under Section 153 A IPC and the prosecution
has to prove the existence of mens rea 1
                                                            in order to succeed.
10. The gist of the offence under Section 153 A IPC is the
intention to promote feelings of enmity or hatred between
different classes of people. The intention has to be judged
primarily by the language of the piece of writing and the
circumstances in which it was written and published. The
matter complained of within the ambit of Section 153A must

1 Balwant Singh v. State of Punjab, (1995) 3 SCC 214

 | P a g ebe read as a whole. One cannot rely on strongly worded and
isolated passages for proving the charge nor indeed can one
take a sentence here and a sentence there and connect
them by a meticulous process of inferential reasoning2.
11. In Bilal Ahmed Kaloo v. State of A.P.3, this Court
analysed the ingredients of Sections 153 A and 505 (2) IPC.
It was held that Section 153 A covers a case where a person
by "words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible
representations", promotes or attempts to promote feeling
of enmity, hatred or ill will. Under Section 505 (2)
promotion of such feeling should have been done by making
a publication or circulating any statement or report
                                                                           was held to
containing rumour or alarming news. Mens rea
be a necessary ingredient for the offence under Section 153
A and Section 505 (2). The common factor of both the
sections being promotion of feelings of enmity, hatred or ill
will between different religious or racial or linguistics or
religious groups or castes or communities, it is necessary
that at least two such groups or communities should be
involved. It was further held in Bilal Ahmed Kaloo (supra)
that merely inciting the feelings of one community or group
without any reference to any other community or group

2 Manzar Sayeed Khan v. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 5 SCC 1
3 (1997) 7 SCC 431

 | P a g ecannot attract any of the two sections. The Court went on
to highlight the distinction between the two offences,
holding that publication of words or representation is sine
 qua non
             under Section 505. It is also relevant to refer to the
judgment of this Court in Ramesh v. Union of India4 in
which it was held that words used in the alleged criminal
speech should be judged from the standards of reasonable,
strong-minded, firm and courageous men, and not those of
weak and vacillating minds, nor of those who scent danger
in every hostile point of view. The standard of an ordinary
reasonable man or as they say in English law "the man on
the top of a Clapham omnibus" should be applied.
12. This Court in Pravasi Bhalai Sangathan v. Union of
India & Ors.5 had referred to the Canadian Supreme Court
decision in Saskatchewan (Human Rights Commission)
v. Whatcott. In that judgment, the Canadian Supreme
                    6

Court set out what it considered to be a workable approach
in interpreting "hatred" as is used in legislative provisions
prohibiting hate speech. The first test was for the Courts to
apply the hate speech prohibition objectively and in so
doing, ask whether a reasonable person, aware of the
context and circumstances, would view the expression as
4 (1988) 1 SCC 668
5 (2014) 11 SCC 477
6 [2013] 1 SCR 467

 | P a g eexposing the protected group to hatred. The second test
was to restrict interpretation of the legislative term "hatred"
to those extreme manifestations of the emotion described
by the words "detestation" and "vilification". This would
filter out and protect speech which might be repugnant and
offensive, but does not incite the level of abhorrence,
delegitimization and rejection that risks causing
discrimination or injury. The third test was for Courts to
focus their analysis on the effect of the expression at issue,
namely, whether it is likely to expose the targeted person or
group to hatred by others. Mere repugnancy of the ideas
expressed is insufficient to constitute the crime attracting
penalty.
13. In the instant case, applying the principles laid down
by this Court as mentioned above, the question that arises
for our consideration is whether the Facebook post dated
04.07.2020 was intentionally made for promoting
class/community hatred and has the tendency to provoke
enmity between two communities. A close scrutiny of the
Facebook post would indicate that the agony of the
Appellant was directed against the apathy shown by the
Chief Minister of Meghalaya, the Director General of Police
and the Dorbar Shnong of the area in not taking any action

 | P a g eagainst the culprits who attacked the non-tribals
youngsters. The Appellant referred to the attacks on non-
tribals in 1979. At the most, the Facebook post can be
understood to highlight the discrimination against non-
tribals in the State of Meghalaya. However, the Appellant
made it clear that criminal elements have no community
and immediate action has to be taken against persons who
had indulged in the brutal attack on non-tribal youngsters
playing basketball. The Facebook post read in its entirety
pleads for equality of non-tribals in the State of Meghalaya.
In our understanding, there was no intention on the part of
the Appellant to promote class/community hatred. As there
is no attempt made by the Appellant to incite people
belonging to a community to indulge in any violence, the
basic ingredients of the offence under Sections 153 A and
505 (1) (c) have not been made out. Where allegations
made in the FIR or the complaint, even if they are taken on
their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima
 facie
        constitute any offence or make out a case against the
accused, the FIR is liable to be quashed7.
14. India is a plural and multicultural society. The promise
of liberty, enunciated in the Preamble, manifests itself in
various provisions which outline each citizen's rights; they
7 State of Haryana & Ors. v. Bhajan Lal & Ors., 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335

 | P a g einclude the right to free speech, to travel freely and settle
(subject to such reasonable restrictions that may be validly
enacted) throughout the length and breadth of India. At
times, when in the legitimate exercise of such a right,
individuals travel, settle down or carry on a vocation in a
place where they find conditions conducive, there may be
resentments, especially if such citizens prosper, leading to
hostility or possibly violence. In such instances, if the
victims voice their discontent, and speak out, especially if
the state authorities turn a blind eye, or drag their feet,
such voicing of discontent is really a cry for anguish, for
justice denied - or delayed. This is exactly what appears to
have happened in this case.
15. The attack upon six non-locals, carried out by masked
individuals, is not denied by the State; its reporting too is
not denied. The State in fact issued a press release. There
appears to be no headway in the investigations. The
complaint made by the Dorbar Shnong, Lawsohtun that the
statement of the Appellant would incite communal tension
and might instigate a communal conflict in the entire State
is only a figment of imagination. The fervent plea made by
the Appellant for protection of non-tribals living in the State
of Meghalaya and for their equality cannot, by any stretch

 | P a g eof imagination, be categorized as hate speech. It was a call
for justice - for action according to law, which every citizen
has a right to expect and articulate. Disapprobation of
governmental inaction cannot be branded as an attempt to
promote hatred between different communities. Free
speech of the citizens of this country cannot be stifled by
implicating them in criminal cases, unless such speech has
the tendency to affect public order. The sequitur of above
analysis of the Facebook post made by the Appellant is that
no case is made out against the Appellant for an offence
under Section 153 A and 505 (1) (c) IPC.
16. For the aforementioned reasons, the Appeal is allowed
and the judgment of the High Court is set aside. FIR PS
Case No.72 (7) 2020 dated 06.07.2020 registered at Police
Station Laban is quashed.

                                                      ................................J.
                                                     [L. NAGESWARA RAO]

                                                      .............................J.
                                                      [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]
New Delhi,
March 25, 2021.

 | P a g e
