                                                                                                  Reportable
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                 Writ Petition (Civil) No 1109 of 2020

    Lt. Col. Nitisha & Ors. .... Petitioners
                                                    Versus

    Union of India & Ors. .... Respondents

                                                      With
                                 Writ Petition (Civil) No 1469 of 2020
                                                      With
                                  Writ Petition (Civil) No 34 of 2021
                                                      With
                                 Writ Petition (Civil) No 1223 of 2020
                                                      With
                                 Writ Petition (Civil) No 1457 of 2020
                                                      With
                                 Writ Petition (Civil) No 1158 of 2020
                                                   And With
                                 Writ Petition (Civil) No 1172 of 2020

Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Reason:
Date: 2021.03.25
15:35:51 IST




                                         J U D G M E N T

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J

This judgment has been divided into the following sections to facilitate analysis:

A A long and winding road
B Steps for implementing the decision in Babita Puniya
C Criteria for the grant of PCs
        C.1 Medical Criteria
        C.2 Substantive Assessment for PC
D Evaluation of the credentials of 615 Women SSCOs
E Submissions
        E.1 Submissions of petitioners
        E.2 Submissions of the respondents
        E.3 The petitioners in rejoinder
F Systemic Discrimination
        F.1 Theoretical Foundations of Indirect Discrimination
        F.2 Position in the United States
        F.3 Position in the United Kingdom
        F.4 Position in South Africa
        F.5 Position in Canada
        F.6 Evolving an analytical framework for indirect discrimination in India:
        F.7 Systemic Discrimination as antithetical to Substantive Equality
G Analysis
        G.1 Selection Process & Criteria set by the Army
        G.2 Benchmarking with the Lowest Male Officer
        G.3 Reliance on Annual Confidential Reports
        G.4 Medical Criteria
        G.5 WSSCOs belonging to WSES(O) 27-31 and SSC(T&NT) 1-3 who had not
                completed 14 years of service as on the date of Babita Puniya
H Conclusion and directions

                                                                                               PART A

"I ask no favour for my sex. All I ask of our brethren is that they take their feet off
our necks"1

      -Late Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Associate Justice, Supreme Court of the
                                                                          United States of America


A A long and winding road

1 By the judgment of this Court in Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. Babita
Puniya2, the claim of women engaged on Short Service Commissions3 in the
Indian Army for seeking Permanent Commission4 was evaluated and held to be
justified. Addressing the background of the dispute, the judgment described this
as "a quest for equality of opportunity for women seeking PCs". As the Court
observed, "a decade and more spent in litigation, women engaged on Short
Service Commissions in the Army seek parity with their male counterparts". The
battle for equality has been long drawn, engaging as much with reforming
mindsets as with implementing constitutional principles.

2 The path traversed by the Women SSC Officers5 commenced with a writ
petition in public interest before the Delhi High Court in 2003. The judgment of
the Delhi High Court which substantially upheld the entitlement of the WSSCOs
was rendered on 12 March 20106. The judgment of the Delhi High Court and its


1 Late Justice Ginsburg quoted Sara Grimk, noted abolitionist and advocate of equal rights of men and women,
while arguing before the Supreme Court of the United States of America in Sharron A. Frontiero and Joseph
Frontiero v. Elliot L. Richardson, Secretary of Defense, et al., 411 U.S 677.
2 "Babita Puniya", (2020) 7 SCC 469
3 "SSCs"
4 "PC"
5 "WSSCO"
6 WP(C) No. 1597 of 2003 (High Court of Delhi)

                                                                                                 PART A

directions7 formed the subject matter of the earlier proceedings before this Court
which resulted in the decision in Babita Puniya (supra) being rendered on 17
February 2020. Between 12 March 2010, when the Delhi High Court pronounced
its judgment, and 17 February 2020, when this Court rendered its decision in
Babita Puniya (supra), there was no stay of the implementation of the judgment
of the Delhi High Court. This, as a matter of fact, was clarified on 2 September
2011 in an order of this Court8.

3 Despite the above clarification, the judgment of the High Court was not
implemented by the Union Government. Several interim orders were issued for
directing a stay on the release of the WSSCOs, for reinstatement in service
coupled with an entitlement to salary. During the pendency of the appeal before
this Court, the Union Government and the Ministry of Defence9 ("MoD") issued a
communication on 25 February 2019 envisaging the grant of PCs to WSSCOs in


7 The directions of the Delhi High Court were in the following terms:
"62.***
    (i) The claim of absorption in areas of operation not open for recruitment of women officers cannot be
    sustained being a policy decision.
    (ii) The policy decision not to offer PC to Short Service Commissioned officers across the board for men and
    women being on parity and as part of manpower management exercises is a policy decision which is not
    required to be interfered with.
    (iii) The Short Service Commissioned women officers of the Air Force who had opted for PC and were not
    granted PC but granted extension of SSCs and of the Army are entitled to PC on a par with male Short
    Service Commissioned officers with all consequential benefits. This benefit would be conferred to women
    officers recruited prior to change of policy as (ii) aforesaid. The Permanent Commission shall be offered to
    them after completion of five years. They would also be entitled to all consequential benefits such as
    promotion and other financial benefits. However, the aforesaid benefits are to be made available only to
    women officers in service or who have approached this Court by filing these petitions and have retired during
    the course of pendency of the petitions.
    (iv) It is made clear that those women officers who have not attained the age of retirement available for the
    Permanent Commissioned officers shall, however, be reinstated in service and shall be granted all
    consequential benefits including promotion, etc. except for the pay and allowance for the period they have
    not been in service.
    (v) The necessary steps including release of financial benefits shall be done by the authorities within two (2)
    months of passing of this order."
8 The order of this Court in Ministry of Defence v. Babita Puniya, 2011 SCC OnLine SC 87 provides as follows:
"2.....
     What is stayed as interim measure by this Court is action of contempt initiated by the original writ petitioners
     against the petitioners in special leave petitions. The operation of the impugned judgment [Babita
     Puniya v. Ministry of Defence, 2010 SCC OnLine Del 1116 : (2010) 168 DLT 115] is not stayed at all."
9 "MoD"

                                                                                               PART A

eight arms or services of the Army (in addition to the existing two streams of
Judge Advocate General10 and Army Education Corps11 which had already been
opened up for PC to WSSCOs). Eventually, in the judgment of this Court dated
17 February 2020, the following directions were issued to the Union Government,
while taking on record its policy statement dated 25 February 2019:

                "H. Directions
                69. We accordingly take on record the statement of policy
                placed on the record in these proceedings by the Union
                Government in the form of the Letter dated 25-2-2019 and
                issue the following directions:
                (i) The policy decision which has been taken by the
                         Union Government allowing for the grant of PCs to
                         SSC women officers in all the ten streams where
                         women have been granted SSC in the Indian Army is
                         accepted subject to the following:
                         (a) All serving women officers on SSC shall be
                               considered for the grant of PCs irrespective of
                               any of them having crossed fourteen years or,
                               as the case may be, twenty years of service.
                         (b) The option shall be granted to all women
                               presently in service as SSC officers.
                         (c) Women officers on SSC with more than fourteen
                               years of service who do not opt for being
                               considered for the grant of the PCs will be
                               entitled to continue in service until they attain
                               twenty years of pensionable service.
                         (d) As a one-time measure, the benefit of
                               continuing in service until the attainment of
                               pensionable service shall also apply to all the
                               existing SSC officers with more than fourteen
                               years of service who are not appointed on PC.
                         (e) The expression "in various staff appointments
                               only" in Para 5 and "on staff appointments only"
                               in Para 6 shall not be enforced.
                         (f) SSC women officers with over twenty years of
                               service who are not granted PC shall retire on
                               pension in terms of the policy decision.
                         (g) At the stage of opting for the grant of PC, all the
                               choices for specialisation shall be available to
                               women officers on the same terms as for the
                               male SSC officers. Women SSC officers shall

10 "JAG"
11 "AEC"

                                                                                                                                               PART A

                                               be entitled to exercise their options for being
                                               considered for the grant of PCs on the same
                                               terms as their male counterparts.
                         (ii) We affirm the clarification which has been issued in
                                      sub-para (i) of Para 61 of the impugned judgment
                                      [Babita Puniya v. Ministry of Defence, 2010 SCC
                                      OnLine Del 1116 : (2010) 168 DLT 115] and order of
                                      the Delhi High Court.
                         (iii) SSC women officers who are granted PC in
                                      pursuance of the above directions will be entitled to all
                                      consequential benefits including promotion and
                                      financial benefits. However, these benefits would be
                                      made available to those officers in service or those
                                      who had moved the Delhi High Court by filing the writ
                                      petitions and those who had retired during the course
                                      of the pendency of the proceedings."


This batch of petitions under Article 32 has questioned the manner in which the
decision of this Court in Babita Puniya (supra) has been implemented.

4 Since the grievance in these proceedings emanates directly out of the
steps taken by the Union Government to implement the earlier decision of this
Court in Babita Puniya (supra), this Court has entertained the petitions under
Article 32. Initially, in the counter affidavit filed by the Colonel Military Secretary
(Legal) at the Integrated Headquarters of the Ministry of Defence (Army), an
objection was raised to the maintainability of the petitions on the ground that the
petitioners should be relegated to the pursuit of remedies before the Armed
Forces Tribunal. However, this plea has not been pressed in the submissions by
Mr Sanjay Jain, learned Additional Solicitor General12 appearing on behalf of the
Union of India, the MoD and the Indian Army. The respondents, through their
written submissions, have also agreed to formulate a policy for granting time-
scale promotions to the WSSCOs who have been granted PC. Hence, only the

12 "ASG"

                                                                                                                    PART B

core contested issues which arose in the course of the proceedings are being
addressed on merits in this judgment.

B Steps for implementing the decision in Babita Puniya

5 The steps which were taken by the Union Government to implement the
decision in Babita Puniya (supra) have been elaborated upon in the

          (i) Counter Affidavit of the respondents; and
          (ii) Written submissions formulated by the ASG.

6 Following the decision in Babita Puniya (supra), a governmental sanction
was issued on 16 July 2020 for taking administrative steps to fulfill the directions.
Accordingly, a set of General Instructions dated 1 August 2020 were issued for
the conduct of a special selection proceeding by a "Special No. 5 Selection Board
2020" to screen WSSCOs for the grant of PC "based on existing policy regarding
grant of permanent commission...applied uniformly to all SCC officers". These
General Instructions were issued by the Integrated Headquarters of MoD (Army)
for implementing the guidelines in Babita Puniya (supra). The relevant extracts
are reproduced below:












                                                                                PART B

"General
1. A Spl No 5 Selection Board (SB) 2020 will be held to
      screen the Short Service Commissioned WOs of the
      following courses, who are in service:
S No Courses Type of Consideration
(a) WSES(O) -3 For PC/ To be Released with
      to 14 courses Pension forthwith (subject to
                            completing 20 yrs pensionable
                            service)
(b) WSES(O)-15 to For PC/To serve till 20 yrs
      26 courses pensionable service & Released
                            with pension
(c) WSES(O)- 27 to For PC/ To be Released on
      31 and completion of the period of
      SSCW(T&NT) - 1 Extension already granted
      to 3 courses

Aim
3. To lay down guidelines for submission of application by
      the WSES(O)s / SSCW(O)s for consideration for grant of
      PC by Spl No 5 SB 2020.

Scope
4. Following issues have been covered in the instructions:
      a. Guidelines for preparation of application
      b. Medical Board
      c. Submission of application
      d. Detailed checklist for submission of documents
      e. Checklist / Misc Instrs for Unit & Sub-Unit Cdrs

Medical Board
9. All officers opting for PC have to undergo a medical
      board at the nearest Military hospital where facilities
      of medical specialists are available. The detailed
      instructions are contained in AO 110/81 & SAI 3/S/70,
      the extract of the same is as under:-

a. Medical Board Proceedings. Only those officers who
      are opting for PC and are SHAPE-1 or Permanent Low
      Medical Category (PLMC) will undergo a medical
      board as per AFMSF-2(ver 2002). Only one copy
      (ie original) of medical board proceedings [medical
      examination report on AFMSF-2 (ver 2002)
      format] without investigation reports and X-ray, duly
      approved by the competent authority, is required to be
      forwarded to MS Branch (MS-7B), through staff (medical)
      channel. Remaining copies of AFMSF-2 will be forwarded
      to AG/MP-5&6, DGMS-5 and respective controlling


                                                                                               PART B

       groups at the MS Branch. The medical board proceedings
       should reach MS Branch (MS 7B) latest by 11 Sep 20.

In case the medical documents are not submitted by the due
date, the concerned officer will be considered as not opted for
PC and will be dealt with as per the type of consideration
mentioned at Para 1 above.

b. Officers with Temporary Low Medical Category
       (TLMC)
  i. Officers with TLMC will submit the proceedings of
           medical categorization (AFMSF-15) / re-categorization
           [AFMSF-15A (ver 2002)] giving their present medical
           category. These documents should reach MS Branch
           (MS 7B) latest by 11 Sep 20. In case the medical
           documents are not submitted by the due date, the
           concerned officer will be considered as not opted for
           PC and will be dealt with as per the type of
           consideration mentioned at Para 1 above.
 ii. Officers with TLMC, who are otherwise found fit for PC
           by the Spl No 5 SB, will be given a maximum time
           period of one year for stabilization of their medical
           category. Such offrs will forward their medical docu on
           AFMSF-2 as per Para 9(a) above, on becoming
           SHAPE-1 of PLVS This time period of one year will be
           counted from the last date of submission of medical
           documents as per Para 9 (b) (i) above i.e. 11 Sep 20.
           Beyond the period, result of the board in respect of
           such offers will be declassified treating them to be
           medically unfit for PC.
 iii. Women officers who are on maternity leave and
           cannot undertake medical examination, will forward
           the medical board proceedings vide which they were
           medically downgraded for maternity leave and follow
           instructions contained in Para 9(b) (i) & (ii) above.

c.Eligibility of PC for Officers with PLMC. The low medical
 category should not be due to medical reasons (whether
 attributable to military service or not) but should have been
 caused as a result of casualties suffered in action during
 operations or due to injury or other disability sustained during
 duty (for example while traveling on duty, playing organized
 games under regimental arrangements, during trainings
 exercises and so on). In addition, medical categories lower
 than S1 or H2 or A3 or P2 or E2 or H2E2 or H2A3 or H2P2 or
 E2A3 or E2P2 are NOT ELIGIBLE for grant of PC. Officers
 are required to forward copies of Court of inquiry, Injury report
 (IAFZ 2006) and notification of battle casualty, if applicable in
 support of their medical category......"
                                                      (emphasis supplied)


                                                                                               PART B

7 Special No. 5 Selection Board was convened between 14 and 25
September 2020 to consider WSSCOs for the grant of PCs. According to the
counter affidavit, this was "on same terms and criterion as their male
counterparts". 615 WSSCOs were considered for the grant of PCs. The result of
the Special No. 5 Selection Board was declared on 19 November 2020.
According to the Union of India, Special No. 5 Selection Board was conducted in
the following manner:

                "[...]
                a. The Military Secretary's Branch constituted a Selection
                     Board as per the provisions of Army Order 18 of 1988,
                     which is being uniformly followed for consideration for
                     grant of permanent commission to all SSC male officers
                     and women officers of AEC & JAG. All Board members
                     were from outside the Military Secretary's Branch. A
                     women officer of Brigadier rank from AMC was also a
                     member of the Board.
                b. Identity of the officers being considered, was hidden from
                     the Board. Women officers who were being considered by
                     the Board were permitted to attend the Board
                     proceedings as observers. A list of such officers and days
                     of their attendance is given at Annexure - R3.
                c. As per the laid down criteria, confidential reports,
                     discipline and vigilance report, if any, honours and
                     awards etc, as on the 5th or 10th years of service, as
                     the case may be, of the women officers, depending
                     upon the terms and conditions opted by the
                     respective officer, was taken into consideration by
                     the Selection Board. This procedure was exactly
                     similar to what was followed for the similarly placed
                     corresponding course & entry (Technical or Non-
                     Technical) made officers.
                d. The Board examined the MDS (Master Data Sheet) of
                     each officer, for grant of Permanent Commission and
                     gave independent value Judgement marks without any
                     mutual consultation.
                e. The Board then compared the total marks of each
                     officer out of 100, with the marks of the male officer
                     with lowest merit granted permanent commission in
                     her corresponding course & entry (Technical or Non-
                     Technical ). Post this, the Board recommended 422 out
                     of 615 officers for grant of Permanent Commission, on
                     merit basis, subject to them meeting the criteria of

                                                                                                PART B

                     medical fitness and DV (Discipline and Vigilance). On
                     scrutiny of these 422 officers, it emerged that 57 out of
                     these 422 had not opted for grant of Permanent
                     Commission. Options (choice) of officers being
                     considered, is not disclosed to the board members during
                     the consideration stage to avoid any biasness."

                                                            (emphasis supplied)


8 The result of the Special No. 5 Selection Board has been tabulated by the
respondents in the following terms:

            (i) Number of WSSCOs considered 615
            (ii) Candidates found fit on merits subject to 422
                   medical and discipline parameters
            (iii) Candidates who did not opt for PC13 57
            (iv) Officers not granted PC and being released 68
                   with pension
            (v) Officers not granted PC and being granted 106
                   extension upto 20 years of pensionable
                   service
            (iv) Balance out of (ii) 365
            (iv)(a) Candidates found fit on merit and on medical 277
            parameters and granted PC
            (iv)(b) Details of remaining candidates 88
                        (a) Temporary Low Medical Category 42
                        (b) Rejected for not meeting the medical 35
                             criteria
                        (c) Application for non-compliance with AO 6
0/1981
                        (d) Document under scrutiny 3
                        (e) Not clear from discipline and vigilance 2



Note: In the above list, 42 candidates who have been placed in the Temporary Low Medical
Category have been granted one year stabilization period during which they have an opportunity
to restore to the required criterion of medical fitness.




13 "non-optee"
                                                    11
                                                                                                          PART B

The above tabulation, supplied on affidavit by the respondents, does not account
for 19 women officers in the breakup. The data provided by the petitioners, on an
analysis of the consolidated result of the Special No. 5 Selection Board
proceedings, indicates the following figures which aids a comprehensive analysis:



            (i) Number of WSSCOs considered 615
            (ii) Candidates granted PC 277
            (iii) Candidates whose result is withheld for 90
                       various reasons, including TLMC
            (iv) Non-optees for PC: 58
                          (a) To be released with pension, forthwith 10
                          (b) To continue till 20 years of pensionable 39
                               service
                          (c) To continue till the expiry of their 9
                               contractual period, without pension
            (v) Candidates who were not granted PC and to 34
                       be released from service with pension,
                       forthwith
            (vi) Candidates who were not granted PC and 90
                       permitted to continue till 20 years of
                       pensionable service
            (viii) Candidates who were not granted PC and are 66
                       to continue till the expiry of their contractual
                       period, with no post-retirement pension
















                                                                                               PART C

C Criteria for the grant of PCs

C.1 Medical Criteria

9 One of the issues which has been debated in the present case is in regard
to the SHAPE-1 qualification for grant of PC. The Army authorities have, in terms
of the General Instructions dated 1 August 2020, stipulated that only those
officers who are in SHAPE-1 would be granted PC. Officers in a Temporary Low
Medical Category14, who are otherwise found fit for PC by the Special No. 5
Selection Board are granted a time period of one year (at the maximum) for
stablization of their medical category. Within a period of one year, the officers
have to forward their medical documentation of having achieved SHAPE-1 status.
As regards officers in the Permanent Low Medical Category15, it has been
stipulated that the low medical category should not be due to medical reasons
(whether or not attributable to military service) but should be a result of casualties
suffered in action during operations or due to injury or other disability sustained
during the course of duty.

10 The medical criteria for the grant of PC are governed by Special Army
Instructions dated 30 April 197016 (as amended from time to time in 1971, 1972,
1973 and 1993) and Army Order 110 of 198117. According to the Union of India,
"the criteria of medical fitness applied for grant of permanent commission, are
exactly the same as applicable to other SSC officers". Whenever the Special No.
5 Selection Board of an SSC officer is deferred and is held subsequently after the


14 "TLMC"
15 "PLMC"
16 "SAI 3/S/70"
17 "AO 110/1981"

                                                                                               PART C

passage of one or two years, an officer has to undertake a fresh medical
examination for the Board.

11 Before adverting to SAI 3/S/70 and AO 110/1981, it is necessary to
understand the meaning and content of the SHAPE-1 norm, which finds place in
Army Order 9 of 201118.

Army Order 9 of 2011

12 The expression "SHAPE" has been explained in AO 9/2011 in the following
terms:

                "30. Medical Classification. Medical
                classification/reclassification of serving officers will be made
                by a duly constituted Medical Board after assessing his/her
                fitness under five factors indicated by the code letter SHAPE
                which will represent following functions (details thereof given
                in Appendix 'E'):-
                S- Psychological including cognitive function
                         abnormalities
                H- Hearing
                A- Appendages
                P- Physical Capacity
                E- Eye Sight"

In each of the above factors, the functional capacity for performing military duties
is denoted by a descending order of fitness, denoted by numerals 1 to 5.
Accordingly, while dealing with functional capacity, AO 9/2011 contains the
following specifications:

                "31. Functional Capacity. Functional capacity for military
                duties under each factor will be denoted by numerals 1 to 5

18 "AO 9/2011", Ref: AO 01/2004/DGMS

                                                                                               PART C

                against each code letter indicating declining functional
                efficiency. These numerals will be used against the word
                SHAPE to denote the overall medical classification and also
                against each factor of SHAPE while describing the disability
                profile. General evaluation of these numerals will denote
                guidelines for employment of the officers as under:-
                "1A- Fit for all duties anywhere.
                1B- Fit for all duties anywhere; under medical observation
                and has no employability restrictions.
                2- Fit for all duties but some may have limitations
                regarding duties which involve severe physical and mental
                stress and require perfect acuity of vision and hearing.
                3- Except 'S' factor, fit for routine or sedentary duties but
                have limitations of employability, both, job wise and terrain
                wise as spelt out in Employment Management Index at
                Annexure II to Appendix 'E' to this Army Order.
                4- Temporarily unfit for military duties on account of
                hospitalization/ sick leave.
                5- Permanently unfit for military duties."


Special Army Instruction -SAI 3/S/70

13 SAI/3/S/70 was issued on 30 April 1970 to regulate the grant of PCs to
SSC officers. According to Para 2(b), the medical category mandating SHAPE-1
was stipulated in the following terms:

                "(b) Must be in Medical Category AYE ONE (A-1). Those who
                have been placed in Medical Category 'A-2', 'B-1' and 'B-2' as
                a result of casualties suffered in action during operations may
                also be considered on merits of each case by the
                Government."








                                                                                               PART C

Para 2(b) was amended in 1972 (Army Instructions 102/72) in the following
terms:

                "(b) For medical fitness, the officer should satisfy the following
                conditions:-

                (i) Their medical category {should not be lower than grade 2
                under any one of the SHAPE factors excluding 'S' factor in
                which the grade should not be lower than 1. In exceptional
                cases grading of 2 in both 'H' and 'E' together may be
                acceptable.

                (ii) The low medical categorisation should not be due to
                medical reasons whether attributable or not (sic) but should
                have been caused as a result of causalities suffered in action
                during operations or due to injury or other disability sustained
                during duty (for example while travelling on duty, playing,
                organised games under regimental arrangements, during
                training exercises and so on).

                (iii) They should be found fit for permanent commission in all
                other respects, through Services Selection Board selection
                where applicable at which selection they will be given
                modified tests, taking into account the specific disability in
                each case."


14 On 1 August 1999, by corrigendum No 14/99, para 2(b)(i) was substituted
as stated below:

                "Existing Para 2(b)(i) is substituted as under:-

                "Their medical category should not be lower than S1 or H2 of
                A3 or P2 or E2 or H2E2 or H2A3 or H2P2 or E2A3 or E2P2.
                However, grant of Permanent Commission to low medical
                category Short Service Commissioned Officers will be subject
                to rendition of the requisite certificate in terms of AO 20/75.""


15 The above policy provides a concession to such candidates who have
suffered an injury on the line of duty as a result of which their medical category
has been lowered. However, the concessions have been qualified. For ease of


                                                                                                     PART C

reference, S1 indicates grade-1 in the S factors; H2 means grade-2 in the H
factors and A3 means grade-3 in the A factor. The requirement of being in
SHAPE-1 is a pre-requisite, even in respect of such arms and services, where
both men and women join at the threshold age of up to 45 years, such as in the
Army Medical Corps. While insisting upon the observance of the SHAPE-1 norm
for the grant of PC, the Army also envisages a Temporary Low Medical Category
- TLMC - under which an officer is given a period of one year, called the category
stabilization period, to return to SHAPE-1.

16 In the batch of writ petitions, eighty six petitioners are involved:
(i) 47 petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 1172 of 2020
(ii) 9 petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 1457 of 2020
(iii) 5 petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 34 of 2021
(iv) 1 petitioner in Writ Petition (C) 1469 of 2020
(v) 14 petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 1223 of 2020
(vi) 9 petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 1109 of 2020
(vii) 1 petitioner in Writ Petition (C) 1158 of 2020

The Army authorities submitted that out of 86 petitioners, 55 are still in SHAPE-1.
Out of the 55, 30 are above the age of 45 going up to 52 years in age. 23 other
petitioners have been placed in PLMC, while the remaining 9 have been placed
in TLMC.






                                                                                               PART C

C.2 Substantive Assessment for PC

Special Army Instruction -SAI 3/S/70

17 SAI 3/S/70 stipulated that "serving short service commissioned officers
granted commission under A-III/S/64 will be eligible for the grant of PCs under
the terms and conditions of service" as laid down in the instruction. Para 2(b)
prescribed medical requirements of SHAPE-1 with certain exceptions for duty-
related casualties (extracted in the earlier section of this judgment). Para 5
envisaged that officers whose applications were in order would be called for an
interview by the Services Selection Board. Under para 6(b), the Services
Selection Boards were to consider the applicants for the grant of PC. The
applicants' performance as short service commissioned officers would be
evaluated and reckoned by the government in assessing their suitability for the
grant of PC. Those found suitable for the grant of PC were to be placed on a
panel. PCs would be granted to those found suitable in all respects in the arms or
services as the case may be, the final decision resting with the government. Para
89(b) stipulated that

                "(b) Permanent commission will be granted depending on the
                vacancies existing in the Arms or Services and the officers
                suitable. The officer's choice of Arm/Service will be given due
                consideration but there is no commitment to give any
                particular Army Service."







                                                                                               PART C

18 Para 10 contained provisions for the manner in which the period as SSC
officer would be counted; para 11 for pay and allowances; para 12 for pensionary
awards; para 13 for termination of commission and para 14 for other conditions of
service.

Army Order 110/1981

19 Officers granted SSC, both technical and non-technical were considered
for PCs on the basis of their service performance in the fifth year of their service.
AO 110/1981 inter alia contained instructions in regard to the submission of
applications and evaluation of medical status by the medical boards. Officers who
were not desirous of being considered for the grant of PC or for extension of SSC
service, and sought release on the expiry of their contractual terms of five years
were required to indicate their option. Similarly, officers who were non-optees for
permanent commissions but were willing to continue on extended SSC services
were required to furnish certain forms.

MoD Policy Letter dated 30 September 1983

20 This specified the criteria for grant of PC to SSC officers. The policy letter
envisaged that :

                "The Selection Board will assess each officer's performance
                based on computerized Member Data Sheet. To facilitate the
                members to arrive at their decision, a computerized Member
                Data Sheet (MDS) indicating the year wise performance of
                each officer including performance on courses, strong points,
                weak points, disciplinary awards etc., will be made available.
                The computer evaluation as spelt out in para 4 below will
                have 80% weightage while 20% weightage will be given to
                the assessment of the members of the Selection Board."



                                                                                               PART C

The above policy letter contemplated the preparation of a computerized Member
Data Sheet indicating the year-wise performance of the officer. Eighty per cent
weightage would be given to the evaluation in the Member Data Sheet19 while
twenty per cent would be assigned for the assessment by the members of the
selection board. The members of the selection board were required to take into
account the MDS and bear in mind, among other things, performance on
courses, strong / weak points, technical assessment and the disciplinary
background, for which they would award marks out of 20. The members of the
selection board were also required to award the following gradings. besides
awarding marks :

            (a) Recommended for Permanent Commission 'B'
            (b) Recommended for Extension only 'BE'
            (c) Rejected for Permanent Commission and 'R'
                    extension
            (d) Withdrawn (for want of sufficient material/ 'W'
                    administrative reasons)
            (e) Deferred 'D'

21 Para 4 of the policy letter envisaged that for preparing the evaluation
sheets, the following information regarding officers would be computed namely:
(i) QAP: Overall performance of the officer is evaluated by taking the average
        of figurative assessment of all reporting officers other than "PTO" and
        "HTO". Average will be worked out for each year as well as for the
        entire period of officer's service. The latter QAP will be converted into a
        proportion of 60 marks;


19 "MDS"

                                                                                                                    PART C

(ii) Honours and Awards: Honours and Awards received by the officer will be
          allotted marks as under:
                          Param Vir Chakra/ Ashoka Chakra 6
                          Maha Vir Chakra / Kirti Chakra 4
                          Vir Chakra / Shaurya Chakra 3
                          Sena Medal / VSM 2
                          Mention-in-Despatches 1.5
                          GOAS's Commendation Card 1


          The marks earned for honours and awards were to be added up, subject to
          the condition that the maximum will not exceed 6 marks.

(iii) Performance grading obtained by the officers on each courses: maximum
          10 marks;
(iv) Strong points reflected in each ACR earned by the officer: maximum 4
          marks;
(v) Recommendation for PC: a positive recommendation would carry 0 mark
          while a 'No' would carry minus 2 marks;
(vi) Weak points: Minus 3 marks could be awarded on the reflection of the
          weaknesses of the officer with reference to qualities of dependability,
          discipline, integrity and loyalty, financial management, addiction to wine,
          lack of morals and personal affairs. Any other weak point would be
          awarded a minus 0.5 mark; and
(vii) Disciplinary awards: the marks would be considered for denial of PC.

The marks/average worked out on the above basis were to be duly computed out
of a total of 80 marks.


                                                                                               PART C

Army Order 18/1988

22 AO 18/1988 formulated the system of selection for the grant of PCs. Para
1 of AO 18/1988 stipulated grant of PC in the 5th year of service to officers:

                "Officers granted Short (sic) Service Commission under
                AI 11/S/64 are considered for grant of Permanent
                Commission by No. 5 Selection Board on this basis of
                their record profile, in the fifth year of their service.
                Option and Medical Board Proceedings are asked for 3 to 4
                months in advance in terms of AO 110/81. The proceedings
                are approved by the Government."
                                                           (emphasis supplied)

Under para 2, the first 50 per cent of officers screened by the Selection Board in
order of merit were to be granted permanent commission; the next 35 per cent
would be granted extension for five years; and the remaining 15 per cent would
be released on completing the contractual period of five years' service. Para 3
stipulates that the selection board would be convened twice a year in May and
September / October to ensure that officers of a particular course are screened
before completing the initial contractual period of five years' service. The
composition of Selection Board No. 5 was provided:

                "4. The occupation of No.5 Selection Board to screen SSCOs
                for PG is as under:
                (a) Chairman - Div Cdr (1)
                (b) Members - Bde Cdr (2)
                                      Brig on Staff (1) outside Army HQ DDG
                                      Org/DDG PS/DDG Rtg(l)
                (c) Secretary - Col. MS-7"






                                                                                               PART C

Under para 6, the gradings to each officer were to be in the following terms:

              (a) Recommended for Permanent Commission 'B'
              (b) Recommended for Extension only 'BE'
              (c) Rejected for Permanent Commission and 'R'
                     extension
              (d) Withdrawn (for want of sufficient material/ 'W'
                     administrative reasons)
              (e) Deferred 'D'


23 Para 7 provided for the assessment of the record profile or each candidate:

                "7. The undermentioned aspects are taken into account for
                computer evaluation and assessment by members of the
                Selection Board:
                (a) Annual Confidential Report.
                (b) Honours and awards.
                (c) Performance on courses
                (d) Recommendations for Permanent Commission.
                (d) Disciplinary awards.
                (e) Strong and Weak Points."

24 Para 8 provided that a minimum of three ACRs would be essential to
consider the case of an officer for PC. If an officer did not have the requisite
number of ACRs, the case would be withdrawn by the Selection Board and the
officer would be granted an extension of one year's service during which, his
case would be considered for grant of PC. Para 9 contained a provision for
obtaining a "comprehensive service data output" in respect of each officer called
the Member Data Sheet. The guidelines for assessment contained in para 13 are
extracted below:

                "13. Assessment is made in accordance with the criteria
                approved by the Government. The salient points are given
                below:



                                                                                               PART C

                (a) Officers are assessed on the merits of their service
                performance as reflected in the ACRs and course reports
                filed in the CR Dossier. Personnel knowledge of an officer
                neither jeopardizes his selection nor is the basis for
                favourable consideration of his case .

                (b) While evaluating ACRs the possibility of subjective/inflated
                reporting and fluctuation in performance of officers
                occasioned by following circumstances, are taken note of:
                (i) Last ACR before assessment for PC.
                (ii) Set of initiating/reporting officers endorsing more than two
                reports.
                (iii) Period covered by the report, if less than six months.

                (c) Rating and assessment in mandatory qualities of loyalty,
                integrity and dependability are given due weightage.

                (d) More weightage are given to reports earned from
                regimental appointment as opposed to staff/ERE if any.

                (e) Low Medical Category of the officer does not
                influence the assessment as it is an administrative
                restriction and not a; criteria for assessment."

                                                           (emphasis supplied)

The requirements of medical fitness were provided in the following terms:

                "21. Officers should satisfy the following conditions:

                (a) Their medical category should not be lower than grade 2
                under any one of the SHAPE factors excluding 'S' factor in
                which the grade should not be lower than 1. In exceptional
                cases grading of 2 in both 'H' and 'E' together may be
                acceptable .
                (b) The low medical categorisation should not be due to
                medical reasons whether attributable or not but should have
                been caused as a result of casualties suffered in action during
                operations or due to injuries or other disability sustained
                during duty, (for example while travelling on duty, playing
                organized games under regimental arrangements, during
                training exercise and so on)."





                                                                                               PART C

25 Under para 23, SSC officers who are not selected for PC but are fit,
suitable and willing would be granted an extension of five years of the SSC
period beyond the initial tenure of five years, on the expiry of which they
would be released from the Army. Under para 24, officers other than those in
an unacceptable low medical category or those charged with disciplinary
action would continue to serve for a total period of ten years or until they
were granted PC whichever is earlier. Para 34 provided that though SSCOs
would be screened only once in the fifth year of service by the Selection Board
for PC. In exceptional cases, the cases of officers for PC could be reviewed
under a 'Special Review'.

MoD Policy Letter dated 15 January 1991

26 A policy letter was issued by the MoD on 15 January 1991 to regulate the
grant of PCs to SSCOs. The policy letter envisaged:

                "
                (a) A maximum of 250 SSCOs will be granted Permanent
                     Commission per year. The number of vacancies for the
                     batches within the year will be allotted in proportion to
                     their inter se strength.
                (b) Minimum acceptable cut-off grade for grant of
                     Permanent Commission to SSCOs will be 60%. This
                     may, however, be reviewed by Army HQrs. every two
                     years, keeping in view the rating tendencies as at that
                     time.
                (c) In case more than the specified number of officers
                     make the grade from the batches considered in a
                     year, the requisite number only, i.e. 250 will be
                     granted Permanent Commission on competitive
                     merit.
                (d) All SSCOs, other than non-optees and those considered
                     unfit for retention by the Selection Board, will be granted
                     five year extension."
                                                           (emphasis supplied)



                                                                                                                     PART C

27 From the above stipulations it becomes evident that
(i) An annual cap of 250 SSCOs for the grant of PCs was introduced;
(ii) The cut-off grade was fixed at 60 per cent, which was liable to be reviewed
          after every two years;
(iii) In the event that more than 250 officers were to make the grade from the
          batches considered for the year, only 250 officers would be granted PC on
          the basis of competitive merit; and
(iv) Other than SSCOs who did not opt for PC and those found unfit, all other
          SSCOs would be granted a five year extension.

28 These stipulations make it abundantly clear that a cut-off grade of 60 per
cent was provided as the eligibility for the grant of PC. An annual cap of 250 was
introduced. In the event that the number of SSCOs who fulfill the eligibility in
terms of the 60 per cent grade exceed the cap of 250, inter se competitive merit
would be the basis for determining those who would form a part of 250 SSCOs
who would be granted PC. Consequently, where the number of SSCOs who had
qualified fell short of the cap of 250 there was no occasion to apply inter se
competitive merit. Moreover, the other SSCOs falling beyond the cap of 250
would be granted a five year extension unless they were "non-optees" or unfit for
retention.

MoD Policy Letters dated 20 July 2006

29 On 20 July 2006, the Integrated Headquarters of MoD (Army) provided
revised terms and conditions of service for men and women SSCOs both in the
technical and non-technical branch:

                                                                                                                         PART C

(i) Grant of SSC (non-technical) to male officers: For SSC men officers in the
          non-technical branch of the Army, a tenure of 14 years' service was
          provided - an initial period of ten years extendable by four years. They
          would be entitled to substantive promotions to the rank of Major and
          Lieutenant Colonel20 on the completion of 2, 6 and 13 years respectively of
          reckonable commissioned service. Serving SSCOs were given an option to
          be governed by the provisions of the revised scheme. Those who opted for
          the revised scheme who were on extension of service and had already
          been considered for PC on the completion of the seventh year or those
          who did not opt for PC on the completion of the seventh year, would not be
          eligible for further consideration for the grant of PC in the tenth year of
          service. On the other hand, optees between the fifth and seventh year of
          service who had not exercised their second option for PC, could be
          considered again for the grant of PC in the tenth year of service. Officers
          between the fifth and seventh year of service who had not exercised their
          second option were allowed to opt to continue under the old scheme;
(ii) Grant of SSC (technical) to men officers Extension of tenure and
          substantive promotions, including PC on similar terms as those for
          SSC(non-technical) for SSCO men technical officers in the Army;
(iii) Grant of SSC (technical) to women officers: By a policy letter dated 20 July
          2006, the Women Special Entry Scheme (WSES) was closed by providing
          for the grant of SSC (technical) to women subject to the following
          conditions:


20 "Lt. Col."

                                                                                               PART C

        a. The total SSC tenure would be 14 years - an initial period of 10
                years extendable by four years;
        b. An option for release was available for newly inducted women
                officers on the completion of five years of service;
        c. Substantive promotions to the rank of Captain, Major and Lt. Col.
                would be provided at the end of 2, 6 and 13 years respectively of
                reckonable service; and
        d. Serving WSES women officers had an option to opt for the SSC
                scheme within six months;
(iv) Grant of SSC (non-technical) to women officers: By another policy letter
        dated 20 July 2006, a similar provision was made for the grant of SSC
        (non-technical) to women officers. Under the terms of the scheme,
        a. The total engagement would be for 14 years (10 years extendable
                by a further 4 years); and
        b. Serving WSES women officers were given an option to opt for the
                scheme;

Army Order 9 of 2011 including Appendix C and D

30 The aim of AO 9/2011 was to lay down instructions / procedures for
carrying out the Annual Medical Examination (AME), Periodical Medical
Examination (PME) and medical classification of all Army officers. The AO was to
supersede all existing instructions and inter alia sought to delineate the criteria for
medical classification vis--vis functional capacity:

                     "31. Functional Capacity. Functional capacity for military
                     duties under each factor will be denoted by numerals 1 to
                     5 against each code letter indicating declining functional


                                                                                               PART C

                     efficiency. These numerals will be used against the word
                     SHAPE to denote the overall medical classification and
                     also against each factor of SHAPE while describing the
                     disability profile. General evaluation of these numerals will
                     denote guidelines for employment of the officers as
                     under:
                     1A- Fit for all duties anywhere.
                     1B- Fit for all duties anywhere; under medical observation
                     and has no employability restrictions.
                     2- Fit for all duties but may have some limitations
                     regarding duties which involve severe physical and
                     mental stress and require perfect acuity of vision and
                     hearing.
                     3- Except 'S' factor, fit for routine or sedentary duties but
                     have limitations of employability, both, job wise and
                     terrain wise as spelt out in Employment Management
                     Index at Annexure II to Appendix 'E' to this Army Order.
                     4- Temporarily unfit for military duties on account of
                     hospitalization/ sick leave.
                     5- Permanently unfit for military duties."

31 Appendix (C) provides for the male average weight in kilograms based on
age group and height with a 10 per cent variation on either side of the average
being acceptable. Appendix (D) contemplates a similar table for female average
weight in kilograms for different age groups and heights with an acceptable 10
per cent variation from the average.

MoD Policy Letter dated 24 February 2012

32 As a result of the policy letter dated 24 February 2012, there was a
revision of the weightage to be ascribed by the No. 5 Selection Board (for grant of
PC / extension to SSCOs) as between
(i) The computerized MDS; and
(ii) Value judgment of the members of the Selection Board.

In the earlier policy letter dated 30 September 1983, the weightage had been
fixed at 80:20. This was revised to 95:5, thereby reducing the subjective element

                                                                                                                    PART D

comprised in the value judgment attributed to members of the Selection Board
from 20 per cent to 5 per cent. In preparing the evaluation sheets, averages were
to be taken against the following items:

(i) QAP - 75 marks
(ii) Honours and awards - 5 marks
(iii) Games, sports and special achievements - 5 marks
(iv) Performance of courses - 10 marks
(v) Weak points - minus 5 marks
(vi) Non-recommendation for PC- minus 2 marks

33 Para 5 of the policy letter envisages that the marks allotted under the
computerized evaluation would be added to the value judgment to assess the
overall merits of officers. A minimum acceptable cut-off of 60 per cent was fixed,
which had to be reviewed every two years:

                    "5. On conduct of the board, the quantified marks for overall
                    performance of the officer would be obtained by adding the
                    value Judgement marks to the Computerised Evaluation. The
                    marks thus obtained would be used to draw out the overall
                    merit of the officers. Minimum acceptable cut-off grade for
                    grant of PC to SSCOs including women officers (sic) will be
                    60% (this may however be reviewed by MS branch every two
                    years keeping in view the rating tendencies as at that time)."


D Evaluation of the credentials of 615 Women SSCOs

34 The basic issue which falls for determination is in regard to the modalities
which have been followed in assessing the 615 WSSCOs for the grant of PC,
after the decision of this Court in Babita Puniya (supra). In order to obviate any
factual dispute, the basis of evaluation is taken from the counter affidavit filed in


                                                                                                                         PART D

these proceedings on behalf of the respondents by the Colonel Military Secretary
(Legal) at the Integrated Head Quarters of the MoD. The relevant disclosures are
contained in the section which titled: "In Re: The Methodology for Conduct of
Special No 5 Selection Board". The counter discloses that 615 women officers
"whose corresponding male counterparts have already been considered" were
considered by a Special No. 5 Selection Board between 14 September and 25
September 2020. The process (as disclosed in the counter) is delineated below:

(i) The Military Secretary's Branch constituted a Selection Board in
          accordance with AO 18/1988. All members of the Board were from outside
          the Military Secretary's Branch. A woman officer of the rank of Brigadier
          was a member of the Board, drawn from the Army Medical Corps. The
          identity of the officers being considered was concealed from the members
          of the Board. The women officers who were being considered were
          permitted to attend the proceedings as observers;

(ii) "As per the laid down criteria", confidential reports, discipline and vigilance
          report (if any), honours and awards "etc", as on the 5th or 10th years of
          service, of the women officers were taken into consideration. This
          procedure was "exactly similar" to similarly placed male officers at the
          entry level;

(iii) The board examined the MDS for each officer for the grant of PC and gave
          independent value judgment marks without mutual consultation;


                                                                                                    PART D

(iv) The marks for each officer, out of a total of 100 were compared "with the
        marks of the male officer with lowest merit granted PC" in their
        corresponding courses and entry (Technical and Non-Technical);

(v) On the above basis, the board recommended 422 out of 615 officers for
        the grant of PC on the basis of merit subject to their meeting the criteria of
        medical fitness, discipline and vigilance;

(vi) Since out of 422 recommended officers, 57 were non-optees after the
        approval of the Selection Board, medical board proceedings of the
        remaining 365 approved officers were scrutinized and the result of the
        Board was declassified on 19 November 2020; and

(vii) Out of 365 women officers 277 have been found fit and granted PC.
        Results have been withheld for 88 officers comprising of the following:

        a. 42 officers are in the TLMC and have been granted a one year
                 period for stabilization;

        b. Medical documents have not been received for 6 officers; and

        c. 40 officers are either in the PLMC or their results have been withheld
                 on administrative grounds including discipline and vigilance
                 clearance.


35 During the course of hearing and in the written submissions, the ASG
informed the Court that out of 615 officers who were considered, 422 were
recommended by the Special No. 5 Selection Board for PC on the basis of merit.
The remaining 193 officers (615 minus 422 found fit) were not recommended,


                                                                                               PART E

though 164 out of these officers fulfill the SHAPE-1 criterion and are SHAPE-1
officers even as of date. Further, out of 422, 57 WSSCOs were non-optees. Out
of the 365 optee officers who were considered fit for PC by the Special No. 5
Selection Board, 277 WSSCOs were granted PCs after medical scrutiny. Out of
the remaining 88 WSSCOs, 42 officers fall in TLMC. The division of the
remaining 46 (that is non-TLMC) is that only 35 did not meet the medical criteria,
which constitutes less than 10% of the women who were considered fit for PC on
merit (10% of 365). 6 officers had not submitted forms compliant with AO
110/1981, 3 officers are under scrutiny and 2 officers are not cleared from the
discipline and vigilance angle.

E Submissions

E.1 Submissions of petitioners

36 Mr P S Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 1109 of 2020 and Writ Petition (C) 34 of 2021 and
Ms Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior Counsel representing the petitioners in Writ
Petition (C) 1172 of 2020, urged the following submissions:

Medical Evaluation:
(i) The procedure laid down in the General Instructions dated 01 August 2020
        is a mechanical reproduction of the existing procedure for male officers,
        who are evaluated for PC in their 5th or 10th year of service, without making
        any modifications;
(ii) The medical criterion laid down in para 9 of the General Instructions is
        arbitrary and unjust as the women officers who are in the age group of 40-


                                                                                                     PART E

        50 years of age are being required to conform to the medical standards
        that a male officer would have to conform to at the group of 25 to 30 years;
(iii) The women officers who are being offered PC at a belated stage, due to
         the fault of the respondents, have already undergone medical scrutiny on
         the completion of their 5th, 10th and 14th years of service when an extension
        of service was granted to them. Thus, they must be exempted from any
        medical scrutiny at this stage of the grant of PC;
(iv) There is no material change in the job profile and the nature of the work
        that is being carried out by the petitioners as SSC officers as compared to
        the profile attached to their work when they will be granted PC.
        Accordingly, any existing medical conditions that the women officers face
        is not an impediment in the discharge of their functions;
(v) The criterion for grant of PC laid down in General Instructions is for officers
        who are in the service bracket of 5-10 years and does not take into
        account that the petitioners have served in the Army for 10-25 years;
(vi) The medical criterion does not account for the physiological changes that
        have occurred due to the passage of time in women officers. These
        include common changes such as hypertension, obesity, diabetes and
        changes associated with pregnancy and lactation;
(vii) In comparison to the women officers, the male officers who were granted
        PC in their 5th or 10th year of service continue to serve in the Army on
        different ranks, regardless of whether they have undergone any
        physiological changes. Thus, medical conditions at a later age are not an


                                                                                                          PART E

         impediment in the career progression of male officers as once the PC is
         granted, there is no repeated medical scrutiny;
(viii) Male officers who have been granted PC in their 5th or 10th year of service
         and have later fallen in the PLMC category are still permitted to continue till
         the attainment of the age of superannuation for all career courses,
         promotions to higher ranks, and opportunities of re-employment among
         others;
(ix) The petitioners at the time of grant of extension of service at their 5th, 10th
         or 14th year have undergone the necessary medical boards and were
         found fit to continue in the Army; and
(x) Owing to the physiological changes occurring due to natural processes of
         aging and hormonal changes occurring due to pregnancy, women officers
         are naturally downgraded to a category lower than SHAPE-1. Thus, they
         are unable to meet the stringent criteria laid down by the General
         Instructions for the grant of PC;

         Reliance placed on Annual Confidential Reports21:

(xi) The reliance placed on ACRs as a basis to grant PC to women officers is
         flawed as in the absence of any provision of PC to women officers, the
         reporting officers used to endorse an "N/A" in the column relating to PC.
         Since the women officers could only seek an extension of service as SSC
         officers and not a PC in the Army, the ACRs were filled out by the reporting
         officers casually, as compared to the ACRs of male officers;


21 "ACR"

                                                                                                       PART E

(xii) With respect to the women officers, the columns regarding medical fitness
         in the ACRs were never filled. In case the women officers were medically
         unfit, they were not given an opportunity to improve;
(xiii) The ACRs prepared during the term of criterion appointments have a
         disproportionate and adverse impact on the petitioners, as they quantify
         participation in junior command courses and other courses such as staff
         college and specialised courses such as M.Tech. Women officers were
         either denied the opportunity of attending these courses or if the
         opportunity was granted, they were not given the benefit of their
         performance during such courses in the ACRs of that year;
(xiv) The process of filling out ACRs for women officers was not conducted
         seriously and good grades were not awarded as the officers were not
         being considered for PC at the time. Thus, the manner of judging and
         grading of ACRs for women officers was different from that of male officers
         and the two cannot be placed on an equal footing;
(xv) The current performance of the women officers and their latest ACRs has
         been completely ignored for the grant of PC. Thus, the hard work and
         qualifications attained after the 10th year of service have not been taken
         into account;
(xvi) Reliance was placed on MoD Policy Letter dated 24 February 2012 on the
         "Criteria for Grant of Permanent Commission/Extension to Short Service
         commissioned Officers". According to para 3 of this letter, for considering
         an officer for extension of service/grant of PC, the overall performance of
         the officer is to be evaluated by taking the average assessment of all


                                                                                                                         PART E

          reporting officers. The average has to be worked out for the entire period
          of the officer's service. Thus, the exclusion of the recent ACRs of the
          petitioners for grant of PC is unfair and arbitrary; and
          Lack of announcement of vacancies:

(xvii) The respondent has failed to announce the number of vacancies against
          which PC would be granted to women officers. The number of vacancies
          available in each batch/service is necessary for an officer to make an
          informed choice of opting for PC. The respondent failed to earmark the
          vacancies available to each batch within each service arm for grant of PC.

37 Mr Sudhanshu S Pandey, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 1457 of 2020, urged the following submissions:

(i) The women officers have never had a level playing field in the Army since
          their induction;
(ii) The use of ACRs as a metric for the grant of PC is arbitrary as unlike their
          male counterparts, the women officers were never given the reasons for
          non-recommendation for an extension of service / promotion; the
          assessment criteria for male and female officers in an ACR was entirely
          different as the women officers were not being considered for future career
          progression;
(iii) The consideration of ACRs of only the initial few years has led to a
          situation where women officers who have been granted commendation


                                                                                               PART E

        certificates and honours by the Chief of Army Staff22 have not been
        granted PC; and
(iv) In 2001, a new evaluation system called 'UAC' was introduced which was
        not easily accessible and was found to be flawed. Although, ACRs were
        subsequently reintroduced, the UAC has been made a basis for evaluation
        and grant of PC to women officers.

38 In addition to the above petitioners, certain other women officers who are
petitioners have faced specific circumstances which have been highlighted during
the proceedings:
(i) The third petitioner in Writ Petition (C) 1109 of 2020, who has been denied
        PC by the results dated 19 November 2020, was selected to undertake an
        M. Tech degree course under the auspices of the Army. During the
        application process for selection, the petitioner was required to give a
        certificate of remittance dated 28 November 2019 stating that if her service
        is terminated or released by the Government due to the finalization of court
        proceedings in the matter concerning the grant of PC, the officer would be
        liable to pay the Government the cost of the training. On her selection, she
        was also required to given an undertaking dated 17 July 2020 to serve the
        Army for a minimum period of 5 years after completion of the course.
        Under the undertaking, if she obtained release or premature retirement,
        she would be liable to pay for the cost of the training course. After the
        denial of PC by the Army on 19 November 2020, a letter dated 1


22 "COAS"

                                                                                                                         PART E

          December 2020 was issued to her demanding recovery of the training cost
          of the course, to the tune of Rs. 8.5 lakh - 10 lakhs;
(ii) The petitioner in Writ Petition (C) 1469 of 2021 has stated that she is being
          harassed by the respondent only on account of the fact that she had made
          a complaint against her Commanding Officer, who had allegedly made
          sexual advances towards her. Although the petitioner's service was
          terminated and she was released from service on 14 February 2018, her
          case was considered for a special review later. On 21 February 2019, she
          was granted an extension of 4 years in service till 16 March 2021. She has
          advanced similar arguments against the process for the grant of PC as the
          other petitioners. During the course of the proceedings, the Court was
          informed that she is being considered by a Special Review Board and
          awaiting the results; and
(iii) The petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 34 of 2021 have supported the
          submissions advanced by other petitioners before the Court. These
          petitioners are 5 women officers of WSES(O) 27th batch, who were
          commissioned in the Army as SSC officers on 18 March 2006 and
          completed their 14 years of service on 18 March 2020. During the grant of
          PC, the petitioners were considered to fall in the category under Para 1(c)
          of the General Instructions dated 1 August 2020, that is "WSES(O)- 27 to
          31 and SSCW(T&NT)- 1 to 3 courses: For PC/To be released on
          completion of the period of extension already granted". The petitioners
          contended that while as on the date of the judgment in Babita Puniya
          (supra), they had not completed 14 years of service, as on the date of the


                                                                                               PART E

        General Instructions dated 1 August 2020, they had completed 14 years
        and 6 months in service. Thus, they were to be considered in the category
        under Para 1(b) of the General Instructions: "WSES(O)- 15 - 26 courses:
        For PC/To serve till 20 years of pensionable service and released with
        pension". Thus, they have submitted that under the judgment in Babita
        Puniya (supra), in case they are not granted PC and have served for more
        than 14 years, they should be entitled to continue in service till the
        attainment of pensionable service.

39 The petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 1223 of 2020, are in the category of
women officers belonging to batch 27 to 31, having been in service for 10-14
years. In terms of the General Instructions dated 1 August 2020, they have been
placed in the category under Para 1(c), under which in case of non-grant of PC,
they would be released on completion of their extension period, without any
pension. Mr Huzefa A Ahmadi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf the
petitioners in Writ Petition (C) 1223 of 2020, made the following submissions:
  (a) There was no valid basis for differentiating between the women officers
          of batches 27 to 31 from their seniors in batches 15 to 26 in the General
          Instructions dated 1 August 2020. The respondents have wrongly
          interpreted the decision of this Court in Babita Puniya (supra) and have
          denied extension of service till 20 years to WSSCOs who have not been
          granted PC and who had not completed 14 years of service as on the
          date of the judgment in Babita Puniya (supra); and


                                                                                                                         PART E

  (b) In case such women officers from batches 27 to 31 who were in service
             between 10 years to 14 years, are released on completion of 14 years of
             service without pension, it would be a gross miscarriage of justice.

E.2 Submissions of the respondents

40 Mr Sanjay Jain, learned ASG, appeared on behalf of the respondents,
assisted by Mr R Balasubramaniam, Senior Counsel. Addressing three broad
issues on the (i) medical yardsticks for grant of PC; (ii) number of vacancies
notified and the criteria for selection; and (iii) process of evaluation through the
ACRs, the learned ASG made the following submissions:

Medical Yardsticks for grant of PC

(i) A writ petition under Article 32 is not maintainable for reliefs sought in
          service matters. The petitioners should have approached the Armed
          Forces Tribunal with their statutory grievance as has been held by this
          Court in Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Orissa and Ors.23 (this
          submission in the counter has not been pressed during the hearing);
(ii) After the decision of this court in Babita Puniya (supra), the respondents
          conducted a Special No. 5 Selection Board between 14 to 25 September
          2020 to consider women for PC. 57 out of the 422 women eligible did not
          opt for PC. Consequently, out of the remaining 365, 277 were found
          eligible for PC;
(iii) The petitioners, on one hand seek parity with their male counterparts. On
          the other hand, they are seeking special and unjustified treatment in the

23 (1983) 2 SCC 433

                                                                                                          PART E

         eligibility criteria for obtaining PC;
(iv) The General Instructions dated 01 August 2020 are administrative
         instructions based on the provisions of the SAI 3/S/70 and AO 110/1981.
         The latter provisions have not been challenged by the petitioners;
(v) The assessment on the medical criteria of a candidate is an intrinsic and
         inseparable part of the process for grant of PC. It is applicable to men and
         women alike;
(vi) The acronym 'SHAPE', translates as S' for psychological including
         cognitive function abnormalities, 'H' for hearing, 'A' for appendages, 'P' for
         physical capacity and 'E' for eyesight;
(vii) The stringent requirements of SHAPE-1 can be relaxed in the event
         candidates have suffered injury on the line of duty which renders a low
         medical categorization permissible;
(viii) The Army follows a concept of TLMC which allows an officer to come back
         in SHAPE-1 in one year. This concept is applicable to the grant of PC as
         well;
(ix) No SSC officer has ever been denied an extension of service due to
         medical reasons. Therefore, the comparison with the petitioner's medical
         fitness levels at their 5th or 10th year of service is baseless, since
         extensions were never denied on medical grounds;
(x) The contention that medical fitness cannot be expected forever in service
         lacks merits. The Army accounts for physiological changes occurring
         during childbirth and time waivers are provided in accordance with existing
         policies. Other physiological changes such as obesity and age are


                                                                                                       PART E

         independent of gender and the petitioners cannot seek an exemption on
         that ground. The criteria of TLMC and PLMC are applicable to serving PC
         officers as well;
(xi) The medical standard of SHAPE-1 weight is as per the age and height of
         the person. These parameters account for the changes induced by
         advancement of age in men and women. Therefore, the petitioners'
         belated consideration for PC does not adversely impact them as against
         their male counterparts;
(xii) WSSCOs who seek to join the Army Medical Corps24 can join up to 45
         years of age, yet they have to comply with the SHAPE-1 medical category;
(xiii) There are 86 petitioners who are contesting this batch of petitions. Out of
         these 86 petitioners, 55 are still in SHAPE-1 (out of these 55, 30 women
         are in the age group of 45-52). 23 petitioners are assigned to the category
         of PLMC and 9 are placed in TLMC;
(xiv) The respondents have wholeheartedly complied with the directions of this
         Court in Babita Puniya (supra) and had identified 365 women for PC. 277
         women have already been granted PC and if certain requirements are
         fulfilled by allottees, the number could rise up to 330;
(xv) This Court, in consonance with the spirit of Article 33, should not interfere
         with the medical yardsticks for determination of PC as this could be
         detrimental to the selected officers and the Army cannot afford to comprise
         on the rigour of its fitness policies;



24 "AMC"

                                                                                               PART E

        Number of Vacancies Notified

(xvi) The MoD, by its letter dated 15 January 1991 had provided that a
        maximum of 250 SSC officers would be granted PC every year, with a
        minimum cut-off grade of 60%. In case more than 250 officers would make
        the grade, then only 250 posts would be granted based on competitive
        merit. No male officer has been granted PC merely by virtue of qualifying
        for the 60% cut-off. This policy and cap of 250 vacancies was relaxed for
        the Special No. 5 Selection Board proceedings, in order to implement
        Babita Puniya (supra), in letter and spirit;
(xvii) The benchmark of assessing the women officers under consideration of
        PC against the benchmark of the last selected officer with lowest merit in
        that particular year is a rational policy, since no upper ceiling was notified
        for vacancies. The PC has to be granted on competitive merit. The policy
        adopted by the respondent is rational, reasonable and non-discriminatory;
        and
(xviii) The least meritorious male officer granted PC with the corresponding batch
        of the WSSCOs is an objective and just benchmark. This yardstick was
        also adopted by the respondent when PC was offered to women SSC
        officers in JAG and AEC in 2010;

        Process of Evaluation through ACRs

(xix) The ACRs are merely one component of the evaluation for PC, which also
        includes other factors of (i) honors and awards; (ii) performance on
        courses; (iii) recommendations for PC; (iv) disciplinary awards; and (v)


                                                                                               PART E

        strong and weak points. In terms of the erstwhile policy dated 15 January
        1991 and the existing policy dated 24 February 2012, competitive merit
        has to be seen inter se officers under consideration for grant of PC.
(xx) The decision of this Court in Brig. Nalin Kumar Bhatia v. Union of India25
        on the inapplicability of value judgement by the Selection Board was
        premised on its peculiar set of facts where the officer there was the sole
        person in the batch to be considered for a promotion. The case was not an
        indictment of policies of inter se merit;
(xxi) The Special No. 5 Selection Board were alive to the reality that the column
        for recommendation of PC for the women officers would be blank.
        Accordingly, the evaluation was conducted on the assumption that all of
        the women who had opted for PC were recommended for the grant of PC
        and accordingly were not granted a 2 mark deduction; and
(xxii) The petitioners in Babita Puniya (supra) had contended that the
        consideration of ACRs for the first 5/10 years of service was a just and
        valid criterion for granting PC. Belatedly requesting for the entire career
        record to be considered would be contrary to applicable policies and the
        directions in Babita Puniya (supra).

E.3 The petitioners in rejoinder

41 Responding to the submissions of the ASG, Mr Patwalia and Ms Arora,
learned Senior Counsel, Mr Sudhanshu S Pandey and Mr Mohan Kumar, learned


25 Civil Appeal No 5629 of 2017 decided on 11 February 2020

                                                                                                                         PART F

counsel, have submitted thus:

(i) The respondents have admitted that as a special case, the vacancy cap
          had been lifted for consideration of women officers for PC. The placement
          of a vacancy cap could be the only reason for a comparative determination
          of merit for PC;
(ii) In comparison to women officers, 85% to 100% male officers have been
          granted PC; and
(iii) The total marks for each woman officer were compared to the lowest
          marks achieved by the male officer who was granted PC, for determination
          of whether the woman officer would qualify for grant of PC. After this, the
          women officers were considered against each other on merit and the grant
          of PC was determined. Thus, the women officers first, had to meet the
          benchmark of the lowest qualifying male officers and second, compete
          inter se women officers. This is in stark contrast to the male officers who
          had to meet no external benchmark and were only required to compete
          among themselves, in the event that they were in excess of 250
          candidates.


F Systemic Discrimination

42 At its heart, this case presents this Court with the opportunity to choose
one of two competing visions of the antidiscrimination guarantee embodied in
Article 14 and 15(1) of the Constitution: formal versus substantive equality. The
formal conception of antidiscrimination law is captured well by Anatole France's


                                                                                               PART F

observation: "The law, in its majestic equality, prohibits the rich and the poor alike
from sleeping under bridges, begging in the streets and stealing bread."26

43 Under the formal and symmetric conception of antidiscrimination law, all
that the law requires is that likes be treated alike. Equality, under this conception,
has no substantive underpinnings. It is premised on the notion that fairness
demands consistency in treatment.27 Under this analysis, the fact that some
protected groups are disproportionately and adversely impacted by the operation
of the concerned law or its practice, makes no difference. An apt illustration of
this phenomenon would be the United States' Supreme Court's judgment in
Washington v. Davis28, which held that a facially neutral qualifying test was not
violative of the equal protection guarantee contained in the 14th Amendment of
the American Constitution merely because African-Americans disproportionately
failed the test.

44 On the other hand, under a substantive approach, the antidiscrimination
guarantee pursues more ambitious objectives. The model of substantive equality
developed by Professor Sandra Fredman views the aim of antidiscrimination law
as being to pursue 4 overlapping objectives. She states as follows:

                "First, it aims to break the cycle of disadvantage associated
                with status or out-groups. This reflects the redistributive
                dimension of equality. Secondly, it aims to promote respect for
                dignity and worth, thereby redressing stigma, stereotyping,
                humiliation, and violence because of membership of an
                identity group. This reflects a recognition dimension. Thirdly, it
                should not exact conformity as a price of equality. Instead, it
                should accommodate difference and aim to achieve structural
                change. This captures the transformative dimension. Finally,

26 Anatole France, THE RED LILY (1898)
27 Sandra Fredman, DISCRIMINATION LAW (Oxford University Press, 2nd edition)2011 at p.8 ("Sandra Fredman,
Discrimination Law")
28 426 U.S. 229 (1976)

                                                                                               PART F

                substantive equality should facilitate full participation in
                society, both socially and politically. This is the participative
                dimension."29


Recognizing that certain groups have been subjected to patterns of discrimination
and marginalization, this conception provides that the attainment of factual
equality is possible only if we account for these ground realities. This conception
eschews the uncritical adoption of laws and practices that appear neutral but in
fact help to validate and perpetuate an unjust status quo.


45 Indirect discrimination is closely tied to the substantive conception of
equality outlined above. The doctrine of substantive equality and anti-
stereotyping has been a critical evolution of the Indian constitutional
jurisprudence on Article 14 and 15(1). The spirit of these tenets have been
endorsed in a consistent line of authority by this Court. To illustrate, in Anuj Garg
v. Hotel Association of India30, this Court held that laws premised on sex-based
stereotypes are constitutionally impermissible, in that they are outmoded in
content and stifling in means. The Court further held that no law that ends up
perpetuating the oppression of women could pass scrutiny. Barriers that prevent
women from enjoying full and equal citizenship, it was held, must be dismantled,
as opposed to being cited to validate an unjust status quo. In National Legal
Services Authority v. Union of India 31, this Court recognized how the patterns
of discrimination and disadvantage faced by the transgender community and
enumerated a series of remedial measures that can be taken for their


29 Sandra Fredman, Discrimination Law (supra n. 28), p. 24
30 (2008) 3 SCC 1
31 (2014) 5 SCC 438

                                                                                               PART F

empowerment. In Jeeja Ghosh v. Union of India32 and Vikash Kumar v. Union
Public Service Commission33 this Court recognized reasonable
accommodation as a substantive equality facilitator.

46 The jurisprudence relating to indirect discrimination in India is still at a
nascent stage. Having said that, indirect discrimination has found its place in the
jurisprudence of this Court in Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India34, where one
of us (Chandrachud J), in holding Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code as
unconstitutional insofar as it decriminalizes homosexual intercourse amongst
consenting adults, drew on the doctrine of indirect discrimination. This was in
arriving at the conclusion that this facially neutral provision disproportionately
affected members of the LGBT community. This reliance was in affirmation of the
decision of the Delhi High Court in Naz Foundation v. Government of NCT of
Delhi35 which had relied on the 'Declaration of Principles of Equality' issued by
the Equal Rights Trust Act in 2008 in recognizing that indirect discrimination
occurs "when a provision, criterion or practice would put persons having a status
or a characteristic associated with one or more prohibited grounds at a particular
disadvantage compared with other persons, unless that provision, criterion or
practice is objectively justified by a legitimate aim, and the means of achieving
that aim are appropriate and necessary."36 Similarly, this Court has recognized
the fashion in which discrimination operates by dint of "structures of oppression
and domination" which prevent certain groups from enjoying the full panoply of


32 (2016) 7 SCC 761
33 2021 SCC OnLine SC 84
34 (2018) 10 SCC 1, paras 442-446
35 (2009) 111 DRJ 1 (DB)
36 Id. at para 93

                                                                                                  PART F

entitlements.37 The focus in antidiscrimination enquiry, has switched from looking
at the intentions or motive of the discriminator to examining whether a rule,
formally or substantively, "contributes to the subordination of a disadvantaged
group of individuals"38.

47 Indirect discrimination has also been recognized by the High Courts in
India39. For instance, in the matters of public sector employment, the Delhi High
Court in Inspector (Mahila) Ravina v. Union of India40 and in Madhu v.
Northern Railways41, has upheld challenges to conditions of employment, which
though appear to be neutral, have an adverse effect on one section of the
society. Bhat, J., while analyzing the principles of indirect discrimination in
Madhu (supra), held:

                 "20. This Court itself has recognised that actions taken on
                 a seemingly innocent ground can in fact have
                 discriminatory effects due to the structural inequalities
                 that exist between classes. When the CRPF denied
                 promotion to an officer on the ground that she did not take the
                 requisite course to secure promotion, because she was
                 pregnant, the Delhi High Court struck down the action as
                 discriminatory. Such actions would inherently affect women


37 Indian Young Lawyers Assn. v. State of Kerala, 2018 SCC OnLine SC 1690, (Chandrachud J., concurring
opinion, paragraph 117); Joseph Shine v. Union of India, 2018 SC OnLine SC 1676, (Chandrachud J,
concurring opinion, para 38) ("Joseph Shine")
38 Ibid, Joseph Shine
39 Patel Suleman Gaibi v. State of Maharashtra, 2014 SCC OnLine Bom 4639
40 Writ Petition (C) 4525 of 2014, Delhi High Court (6 August 2015)
41 "Madhu", 2018 SCC OnLine Del 6660. A challenge to conditions of employment/promotion in the Army Dental
Corps was also made before the Delhi High Court in Dr. Jacqueline Jacinta Dias & Ors. v. Union of India &
Ors., (2018 SCC OnLine Del 12426). However, the challenge could not succeed as the Court failed to discern
any manifest bias. In doing so however, the High Court pointed out to the lack of clear norms regarding indirect
discrimination in India and noted:

 "35... This court is conscious of the fact that indirect discrimination is harder to prove or establish. Hidden
      biases, where establishments or individuals do not overtly show bias, but operate within a discriminatory
      environment therefore, is hard to establish. Yet, to show such bias [...], there should have been something
      in the record-such as pattern of marking, or predominance of some element, manifesting itself in the
      results declared. This court is unable to discern any; Nor is there any per se startling consequence
      apparent from the granular analysis of the results carried out. Furthermore, equality jurisprudence in India
      has not yet advanced as to indicate clear norms (unlike legislative rules in the EU and the UK) which
      guide the courts. Consequently, it is held that the complaint of gender discrimination or arbitrariness is not
      made out from the record."

                                                                                                   PART F

                 more than men. The Court in Inspector (Mahila)
                 Ravina v. Union of India W.P.(C) 4525/2014 stated,
                     "A seemingly "neutral" reason such as inability of the
                      employee, or unwillingness, if not probed closely, would
                      act in a discriminatory manner, directly impacting her
                      service rights. That is exactly what has happened here:
                      though CRPF asserts that seniority benefit at par with the
                      petitioner's colleagues and batchmates (who were able to
                      clear course No. 85) cannot be given to her because she
                      did not attend that course, in truth, her "unwillingness"
                      stemmed from her inability due to her pregnancy.""
                                                              (emphasis supplied)

48 We must clarify here that the use of the term 'indirect discrimination' is not
to refer to discrimination which is remote, but is, instead, as real as any other
form of discrimination. Indirect discrimination is caused by facially neutral criteria
by not taking into consideration the underlying effects of a provision, practice or a
criterion42.

49 The facts of this case present an opportune moment for evaluating the
practices of the respondents in evaluation for the grant of PC. In this segment of
the judgment, we will first outline the theoretical foundations of the doctrine of
indirect discrimination. We will then survey comparative jurisprudence concerning
the doctrine, with a view to understand its key constituents and the legal
questions surrounding its application, namely the evidentiary burden to be
discharged to invoke the doctrine and the standards of justification to be applied.
We will then offer a roadmap for understanding and operationalizing indirect
discrimination in Indian antidiscrimination law.



42 Interchangeably referred as "PCP"

                                                                                                                                             PART F

50 In evaluating direct and indirect discrimination, it is important to underscore
that these tests, when applied in strict disjunction from one another, may end up
producing narrow conceptions of equality which may not account for systemic
flaws that embody discrimination. Therefore, we will conclude this section with an
understanding of a systemic frame of analysis, in order to adequately redress the
full extent of harm that certain groups suffer, merely on account of them
possessing characteristics that are prohibited axles of discrimination.

F.1 Theoretical Foundations of Indirect Discrimination

51 Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan explain the concept of indirect
discrimination using Aesop's fable of the fox and the stork. They note:

                        "Aesop's fable of the fox and the stork invokes the idea of
                        indirect discrimination. The story tells how the fox invited the
                        stork for a meal. For a mean joke, the fox served soup in a
                        shallow dish, which the fox could lap up easily, but the stork
                        could only wet the end of her long bill on the plate and
                        departed still hungry. The stork invited the fox for a return visit
                        and served soup in a long-necked jar with a narrow mouth,
                        into which the fox could not insert his snout. Whilst several
                        moral lessons might be drawn from this tale, it is often
                        regarded as supporting the principle that one should have
                        regard to the needs of others, so that everyone may be given
                        fair opportunities in life. Though formally giving each animal
                        an equal opportunity to enjoy the dinner, in practice the
                        vessels for the serving of the soup inevitably excluded the
                        guest on account of their particular characteristics."43


52 Another excellent formulation of the doctrine can be found in the opinion
of Advocate General Maduro of the Court of Justice of the European Union
(CJEU). He notes that the distinctive attribute of direct discrimination is that the
discriminator explicitly relies on a suspect classification (prohibited ground of

43 FOUNDATIONS OF NDIRECT I DISCRIMINATION LAW (Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan (eds), Hart Publishing) 2018
at p.1

                                                                                               PART F

discrimination) to act in a certain way. Such classification serves as an essential
premise of the discriminator's reasoning. On the other hand, in indirect
discrimination, the intention of the discriminator, and the reasons for his actions
are irrelevant. He pertinently observes: "In fact, this is the whole point of the
prohibition of indirect discrimination: even neutral, innocent or good faith
measures and policies adopted with no discriminatory intent whatsoever will be
caught if their impact on persons who have a particular characteristic is greater
than their impact on other persons."44

53 Thus, as long as a court's focus is on the mental state underlying the
impugned action that is allegedly discriminatory, we are in the territory of direct
discrimination. However, when the focus switches to the effects of the concerned
action, we enter the territory of indirect discrimination. An enquiry as to indirect
discrimination looks, not at the form of the impugned conduct, but at its
consequences. In a case of direct discrimination, the judicial enquiry is confined
to the act or conduct at issue, abstracted from the social setting or background
fact-situation in which the act or conduct takes place. In indirect discrimination, on
the other hand, the subject matter of the enquiry is the institutional or societal
framework within which the impugned conduct occurs. The doctrine seeks to
broaden the scope of antidiscrimination law to equip the law to remedy patterns
of discrimination that are not as easily discernible.






44 Coleman v. Attridge Law, [2008] IRLR 722

                                                                                                 PART F

F.2 Position in the United States

54 The genesis of the doctrine can be traced to the celebrated United States
Supreme Court judgment in Griggs v. Duke Power Co45. The issue concerned
manual work for which the prescribed qualifications included the possession of a
high school education and satisfactory results in an aptitude test. Two facts about
the case bear emphasis. First, due to the inferior quality of segregated school
education, African-American candidates were disqualified in higher numbers
because of the aforementioned requirements than their white counterparts.
Second, neither of these two requirements was shown to be significantly related
to successful job performance.

55 Construing the prohibition on discrimination embodied in Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, Chief Justice Burger held:

                 "The Act proscribes not only overt discrimination but also
                 practices that are fair in form, but discriminatory in operation."
                 He went on: "good intent or absence of discriminatory intent
                 does not redeem employment procedures or testing
                 mechanisms that operate as "built-in headwinds" for minority
                 groups and are unrelated to measuring job capability." 46

On the question of the standard of justification for rebutting a charge of indirect
discrimination, the Court held as follows:

                 "The touchstone is business necessity. If an employment
                 practice which operates to exclude Negroes cannot be shown
                 to be related to job performance, the practice is prohibited."47




45 "Griggs", 401 US 424, 431 (1971)
46 Id. at p. 431
47 Ibid.

                                                                                                        PART F

Griggs, therefore, laid the groundwork for the thinking that meaningful equality
does not merely mean the absence of intentional inequality. A statutory
manifestation of disparate impact was codified in US law in the shape of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991. Section 10548 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 makes a practice
causing disparate impact a prima facie violation. The presumption can be
rebutted by establishing that the practice is linked to the job and business. This
can be overcome by a showing of alternative, equally efficacious, practices not
causing disparate impact.

56 In 2005, in Smith v. City of Jackson49, the US Supreme Court construed
statutory language in The Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 1967 which
proscribed actions which "otherwise adversely affect" an employee. This was


48 "SEC. 105. BURDEN OF PROOF IN DISPARATE IMPACT CASES.
(a) Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) is amended by adding at the end the following
new subsection:
`(k)(1)(A) An unlawful employment practice based on disparate impact is established under this title only if--
`(i) a complaining party demonstrates that a respondent uses a particular employment practice that causes a
disparate impact on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin and the respondent fails to
demonstrate that the challenged practice is job related for the position in question and consistent with business
necessity; or
`(ii) the complaining party makes the demonstration described in subparagraph (C) with respect to an alternative
employment practice and the respondent refuses to adopt such alternative employment practice.
`(B)(i) With respect to demonstrating that a particular employment practice causes a disparate impact as
described in subparagraph (A)(i), the complaining party shall demonstrate that each particular challenged
employment practice causes a disparate impact, except that if the complaining party can demonstrate to the court
that the elements of a respondent's decisionmaking process are not capable of separation for analysis, the
decisionmaking process may be analyzed as one employment practice.
`(ii) If the respondent demonstrates that a specific employment practice does not cause the disparate impact, the
respondent shall not be required to demonstrate that such practice is required by business necessity.
`(C) The demonstration referred to by subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be in accordance with the law as it existed on
June 4, 1989, with respect to the concept of `alternative employment practice'.
`(2) A demonstration that an employment practice is required by business necessity may not be used as a
defense against a claim of intentional discrimination under this title.
`(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a rule barring the employment of an individual who currently
and knowingly uses or possesses a controlled substance, as defined in schedules I and II of section 102(6) of the
Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)), other than the use or possession of a drug taken under the
supervision of a licensed health care professional, or any other use or possession authorized by the Controlled
Substances Act or any other provision of Federal law, shall be considered an unlawful employment practice
under this title only if such rule is adopted or applied with an intent to discriminate because of race, color, religion,
sex, or national origin.'.
(b) No statements other than the interpretive memorandum appearing at Vol. 137 Congressional Record S 15276
(daily ed. Oct. 25, 1991) shall be considered legislative history of, or relied upon in any way as legislative history
in construing or applying, any provision of this Act that relates to Wards Cove--Business
necessity/cumulation/alternative business practice."
49 544 US 228 (2005)

                                                                                               PART F

read to include disparate impact liability. The Court held that this phrase "focuses
on the effects of the action on the employee rather than the motivation for the
action of the employer."

57 The third major case on disparate impact liability decided by the US
Supreme Court was in 2015, concerning the Fair Housing Act which the Court
interpreted as including disparate impact liability.50 The Court also made
instructive observations on the burden of proof that a plaintiff espousing a claim
of disparate impact on the basis of statistical disparity must discharge. It held that
the plaintiff must be able to establish that the defendant's policy is the cause of
the disparity. The Court noted: "A robust causality requirement [...] protects
defendants from being liable for racial disparities they did not create."51 On the
standard of justification for rebutting such a claim, the Court held that courts must
assess claims of disparate impact liability with caution so that defendants are
provided reasonable margin for devising requisite policies that are tailored for
their work requirement.

F.3 Position in the United Kingdom

58 In the United Kingdom (UK), the fault-line that separates direct
discrimination from indirect discrimination is not the intention of the discriminator.
Rather, it is the fact that direct discrimination cannot be justified in any
circumstance, while indirect discrimination is susceptible to justification. To quote
Baroness Hale:


50 Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs v. Inclusive Communities Project Inc, 135 S Ct
2411 [2015], per Kennedy J
51 Id. at para 20

                                                                                                     PART F

                 "Direct and indirect discrimination are mutually exclusive. You
                 cannot have both at once ... The main difference between
                 them is that direct discrimination cannot be justified. Indirect
                 discrimination can be justified if it is a proportionate means of
                 achieving a legitimate aim."52

59 The statutory definition of indirect discrimination is engrafted in Section
1953 of the Equality Act, 2010. The definition has 4 salient features. First, it covers
provisions, criteria and practices that are applied in a uniform fashion, to those
with and without the ground on which discrimination is alleged. Second, the PCP
puts, or would put, persons with whom the claimant shares the relevant ground at
a particular disadvantage when compared with persons with whom the claimant
does not share it. Third, the claimant herself would be put, or is put, to such
disadvantage by the operation of the PCP. Finally, the defendant cannot show
the PCP to be a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.

60 An instructive judgment of the UK Supreme Court for us is Essop v. Home
Office (UK Border Agency)54. At issue was the allegedly disproportionate
impact of an exam called the Core Skills Assessment, to secure public sector
employment and promotion in civil services, on "black and minority ethnic (BME)"
and older candidates. The Court noted the statistical disparity in the following
terms:


52 R (on the application of E) v. JFS Governing Body, [2009] UKSC 15, para 57
53 "19. Indirect discrimination
(1)A person (A) discriminates against another (B) if A applies to B a provision, criterion or practice which is
discriminatory in relation to a relevant protected characteristic of B's.
(2)For the purposes of subsection (1), a provision, criterion or practice is discriminatory in relation to a relevant
protected characteristic of B's if-
(a)A applies, or would apply, it to persons with whom B does not share the characteristic,
(b)it puts, or would put, persons with whom B shares the characteristic at a particular disadvantage when
compared with persons with whom B does not share it,
(c)it puts, or would put, B at that disadvantage, and
(d)A cannot show it to be a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.
(3)The relevant protected characteristics are-age; disability; gender reassignment; marriage and civil
partnership; race; religion or belief; sex; sexual orientation."
54 [2017] UKSC 27


                                                                                                                         PART F

                     "The BME pass rate was 40.3% of that of the white
                     candidates. The pass rate of candidates aged 35 or older was
                     37.4% of that of those below that age. In each case, there was
                     a 0.1% likelihood that this could happen by chance. Of course,
                     they did not all fail. No-one knows why the proportion of BME
                     or older candidates failing is significantly higher than the
                     proportion of white or younger candidates failing."


61 The Court outlined the following salient features of indirect discrimination in
UK law:

(i) There is no need for the claimant to show why the PCP discriminates
          against individuals possessing the relevant ground. The fact that the PCP
          has such a disproportionate impact is sufficient;

(ii) Direct discrimination requires a causal link between the less favourable
          treatment and the relevant ground. On the other hand, indirect
          discrimination requires a causal link between the PCP and the particular
          disadvantage suffered by the group and the individual. This difference is
          rooted in the fact that the aim of direct discrimination is to achieve equality
          of treatment. On the other hand, indirect discrimination seeks to create a
          level playing field, by spotting and eliminating hidden barriers which
          disproportionately affect a particular group, absent a legally acceptable
          justification;

(iii) The inability of the relevant group to comply with the PCP can be ascribed
          to a variety of 'context factors'. These can include genetic factors, social
          understandings, archetypal presuppositions, etc.;

(iv) In order for a claim of indirect discrimination to succeed, it is not necessary
          to show that every single member of the group possessing the relevant


                                                                                                     PART F

        ground was unable to meet the PCP. It is enough to show that the PCP
        disproportionately disadvantaged members of the concerned group;

(v) It is commonplace for indirect discrimination to be established on the basis
        of statistical evidence. Such evidence is often able to show the causal link
        that a particular variable played in arriving at a particular outcome; and

(vi) Finally, the defendant can always rebut a charge of indirect discrimination
        by showing that there exists a good justification for the PCP at issue.


F.4 Position in South Africa

62 In keeping with the progressive vision of the South African Constitution,
Section 9 of the South African Constitution55 prohibits indirect discrimination. The
judicial exegesis of indirect discrimination can first be found in the judgment of
the South African Constitutional Court56 in the case of City Council of Pretoria
v. Walker57 in which the Court expounded on the doctrine in the following terms:

                 "The concept of indirect discrimination, ... was developed
                 precisely to deal with situations where discrimination lay
                 disguised behind apparently neutral criteria or where persons
                 already adversely hit by patterns of historic subordination had
                 their disadvantage entrenched or intensified by the impact of
                 measures not overtly intended to prejudice them. In many
                 cases, particularly those in which indirect discrimination is
                 alleged, the protective purpose would be defeated if the

55 "9 (1) Everyone is equal before the law and has the right to equal protection and benefit of the law;
(2) Equality includes the full and equal enjoyment of all rights and freedoms. To promote the achievement of
equality, legislative and other measures designed to protect or advance persons, or categories of persons,
disadvantaged by unfair discrimination may be taken;
(3) The state may not unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone on one or more grounds, including
race, gender, sex, pregnancy, marital status, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age, disability,
religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and birth;
(4) No person may unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone on one or more grounds in terms of
subsection (3). National legislation must be enacted to prevent or prohibit unfair discrimination;
(5) Discrimination on one or more of the grounds listed in subsection (3) is unfair unless it is established that the
discrimination is fair."
56 "SACC"
57 (1998) 3 BCLR 257, paras 31-32

                                                                                               PART F

                persons complaining of discrimination had to prove not only
                that they were unfairly discriminated against but also that the
                unfair discrimination was intentional. This problem would be
                particularly acute in cases of indirect discrimination where
                there is almost always some purpose other than a
                discriminatory purpose involved in the conduct or action to
                which objection is taken."

In elaborating on how the impugned provision does not necessarily have to make
a suspect classification on the grounds of race, the SACC concluded that
differentiation between the treatment of residents of areas which were
"historically, and overwhelmingly occupied by black persons....as opposed to
areas which were still overwhelmingly white" was sufficient to evince indirect
discrimination on the grounds of race.

63 In a recent judgment in Mahlangu and Another v. Minister of Labour58,
the SACC had to rule on the constitutionality of Section 1(xix)(v) of the
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act. This provision
explicitly excluded domestic workers from the definition of employees under the
Act. This had the consequence of depriving domestic workers access to the
social security benefits contained in the legislation, in the event of injury,
disablement and death. The SACC, inter alia, returned a finding that the provision
was hit by the constitutional prohibition on indirect discrimination. This was for the
reason that domestic workers are predominantly black women. As a result, held
the Court: "This means discrimination against them constitutes indirect
discrimination on the basis of race, sex and gender."




58 [2020] ZACC 24

                                                                                                PART F

F.5 Position in Canada

64 In Ontario Human Rights Commission v. Simpsons-Sears59, the
Canadian Supreme Court expounded the doctrine of indirect discrimination (what
it called adverse effects discrimination), while entertaining a challenge under
Section 4(1)(g) of the Ontario Human Rights Code60. In analyzing whether a work
policy mandating inflexible working hours on Friday evenings and Saturdays
indirectly discriminated against the Appellant on the basis of her creed, in that her
religion required her to strictly observe the Sabbath, the Court noted:

                "18. A distinction must be made between what I would
                describe as direct discrimination and the concept already
                referred to as adverse effect discrimination in connection with
                employment. Direct discrimination occurs in this connection
                where an employer adopts a practice or rule which on its face
                discriminates on a prohibited ground. For example, "No
                Catholics or no women or no blacks employed here." There is,
                of course, no disagreement in the case at bar that direct
                discrimination of that nature would contravene the Act. On the
                other hand, there is the concept of adverse effect
                discrimination. It arises where an employer for genuine
                business reasons adopts a rule or standard which is on its
                face neutral, and which will apply equally to all employees, but
                which has a discriminatory effect upon a prohibited ground on
                one employee or group of employees in that it imposes,
                because of some special characteristic of the employee or
                group, obligations, penalties, or restrictive conditions not
                imposed on other members of the work force. For essentially
                the same reasons that led to the conclusion that an intent to
                discriminate was not required as an element of discrimination
                contravening the Code I am of the opinion that this Court may
                consider adverse effect discrimination as described in these
                reasons a contradiction of the terms of the Code. An
                employment rule honestly made for sound economic or
                business reasons, equally applicable to all to whom it is
                intended to apply, may yet be discriminatory if it affects a
                person or group of persons differently from others to whom it
                may apply. From the foregoing I therefore conclude that the


59 "Ontario HRC", [1985] 2 SCR 53
60 Section 4(1)(g) of the Ontario Human Rights Code prohibited discrimination against an employee with regards
to any term or condition of employment on the basis of race, creed, colour, sex, age etc.

                                                                                               PART F

                appellant showed a prima facie case of discrimination based
                on creed before the Board of Inquiry."

It was further noted that the aim of the guarantee against discrimination is "not to
punish the discriminator, but rather to provide relief for the victims of
discrimination. It is the result or the effect of the action complained of which is
significant." Thus if the impugned action has the effect to "impose on one person
or group of persons obligations, penalties, or restrictive conditions not imposed
on other members of the community, it is discriminatory."61


65 The principles laid down in Ontario HRC (supra) were consistently applied
by the courts in Canada to protect indirect discrimination. In a recent judgment in
Fraser v. Canada (Attorney General)62, the Canadian Supreme Court was
called on to determine the constitutionality of a rule categorizing job-sharing
positions as "part-time work" for which participants could not receive full-time
pension. Under the job-sharing programme, optees for the programme could split
the duties and responsibilities of one full-time position. A large majority of the
optees for the job-sharing programme were women, who found it burdensome to
carry out the responsibilities of work and domestic work and were particularly hit
by the new rule as they would lose out on pension benefits. The Court recognized
indirect discrimination as a legal response to the fact that discrimination is
"frequently a product of continuing to do things the way they have always been
done", as opposed to intentionally discriminatory actions.63 Pertinently, the Court
outlined a 2-step test for conducting an indirect discrimination enquiry. First, the


61 Ontario HRC (supra n.60) at para 12
62 ("Fraser"), 2020 SCC 28
63 Id. at para 31

                                                                                               PART F

Court has to enquire whether the impugned rule disproportionately affects a
particular group. As an evidentiary matter, this entails a consideration of material
that demonstrates that "membership in the claimant group is associated with
certain characteristics that have disadvantaged members of the group". However,
as such evidence might be hard to come by, reliance can be placed on evidence
generated by the claimant group itself. Further, while statistical evidence can
serve as concrete proof of disproportionate impact, there is no clear quantitative
threshold as to the quantum of disproportionality to be established for a charge of
indirect discrimination to be brought home. Equally, recognizing the importance of
applying a robust judicial common sense, the Court held: "In some cases,
evidence about a group will show such a strong association with certain traits-
such as pregnancy with gender-that the disproportionate impact on members of
that group will be apparent and immediate".64 Second, the Court has to look at
whether the law has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating
disadvantage. Such disadvantage could be in the shape of: "[e]conomic exclusion
or disadvantage, [s]ocial exclusion...[p]sychological harms...[p]hysical
harms...[or] [p]olitical exclusion", and must be viewed in light of any systemic or
historical disadvantages faced by the claimant group."65

F.6 Evolving an analytical framework for indirect discrimination in India:

66 A study of the above cases and scholarly works gives rise to the following
key learnings. First, the doctrine of indirect discrimination is founded on the
compelling insight that discrimination can often be a function, not of conscious


64 Id. at paras 50-72
65 Id. at para 76

                                                                                               PART F

design or malicious intent, but unconscious/implicit biases or an inability to
recognize how existing structures/institutions, and ways of doing things, have the
consequence of freezing an unjust status quo. In order to achieve substantive
equality prescribed under the Constitution, indirect discrimination, even sans
discriminatory intent, must be prohibited.

67 Second, and as a related point, the distinction between direct and indirect
discrimination can broadly be drawn on the basis of the former being predicated
on intent, while the latter is based on effect (US, South Africa, Canada).
Alternatively, it can be based on the fact that the former cannot be justified, while
the latter can (UK). We are of the considered view that the intention versus
effects distinction is a sound jurisprudential basis on which to distinguish direct
from indirect discrimination. This is for the reason that the most compelling
feature of indirect discrimination, in our view, is the fact that it prohibits conduct,
which though not intended to be discriminatory, has that effect. As the Canadian
Supreme Court put it in Ontario HRC (supra), requiring proof of intention to
establish discrimination puts an "insuperable barrier in the way of a complainant
seeking a remedy."66 It is this barrier that a robust conception of indirect
discrimination can enable us to counteract.

68 Third, on the nature of evidence required to prove indirect discrimination,
statistical evidence that can establish how the impugned provision, criteria or
practice is the cause for the disproportionately disadvantageous outcome can be
one of the ways to establish the play of indirect discrimination. As Professor


66 Ontario HRC (supra n. 60), para 14

                                                                                               PART F

Sandra Fredman notes, "Aptitude tests, interview and selection processes, and
other apparently scientific and neutral measures might never invite scrutiny
unless data is available to dislodge these assumptions."67 Consistent with the
Canadian Supreme Court's approach in Fraser (supra), we do not think that it
would be wise to lay down any quantitative thresholds for the nature of statistical
disparity that must be established for a claimant to succeed. Equally, we do not
think that an absolutist position can be adopted as to the nature of evidence that
must be brought forth to succeed in a case of indirect discrimination. The
absence of any statistical evidence or inability to statistically demonstrate
exclusion cannot be the sole ground for debunking claims of indirect
discrimination. This was clarified by the European Court of Human Rights in a
case concerning fifteen Croatians of Roma origin claiming racial discrimination
and segregation in schools with Roma-only classes. In assessing the claims of
the fifteen Croatians, the court observed that indirect discrimination can be
proved without statistical evidence68. Therefore, statistical evidence
demonstrating patterns of exclusion, can be one of the ways to prove indirect
discrimination.

69 Fourth, insofar as the fashion in which the indirect discrimination enquiry
must be conducted, we think that the two-stage test laid down by the Canadian
Supreme Court in Fraser (supra) offers a well-structured framework of analysis
as it accounts for both the disproportionate impact of the impugned provision,
criteria or practice on the relevant group, as well as the harm caused by such


67 Sandra Fredman, Discrimination Law (supra n. 28) at p. 187
68 Orsus and others v. Croatia, [2010] ECHR 337, para 153

                                                                                               PART F

impact. It foregrounds an examination of the ills that indirect discrimination seeks
to remedy.

70 Fifth and finally, while assessing the justifiability of measures that are
alleged to have the effect of indirect discrimination, the Court needs to return a
finding on whether the narrow provision, criteria or practice is necessary for
successful job performance. In this regard, some amount of deference to the
employer/defendant's view is warranted. Equally, the Court must resist the
temptation to accept generalizations by defendants under the garb of deference
and must closely scrutinize the proffered justification. Further, the Court must
also examine if it is possible to substitute the measures with less discriminatory
alternatives. Only by exercising such close scrutiny and exhibiting attentiveness
to the possibility of alternatives can a Court ensure that the full potential of the
doctrine of indirect discrimination is realized and not lost in its application.69

F.7 Systemic Discrimination as antithetical to Substantive Equality

71 As noted in the analysis above, the emphasis on intent alone as the key to
unlocking discrimination has resulted in several practices, under the veneer of
objectivity and "equal" application to all persons, to fall through the cracks of our
equality jurisprudence. Indirect discrimination as a tool of jurisprudential analysis,
can result in the redressal of several inequities by probing provisions, criteria or
practice that have a disproportionate and adverse impact on members of groups
who belong to groups that are constitutionally protected from discrimination under
Article 15(1). However, it needs to be emphasized that a strict emphasis on using

69 Sandra Fredman, Discrimination Law (supra n. 28) at p. 194

                                                                                               PART F

only one of the two tools (between direct and indirect discrimination) to establish
and redress discrimination may often result in patterns and structures of
discrimination remaining unaddressed.

72 In order to conceptualize substantive equality, it would be apposite to
conduct a systemic analysis of discrimination that combines tools of direct and
indirect discrimination. In the words of Professor Marie Mercat- Bruns70:

                "Systemic discrimination posits the need to conceptualize
                discrimination in terms of workplace dynamics rather than
                solely in existing terms of an identifiable actor's isolated state
                of mind, a victim's perception of his or her own work
                environment, or the job-relatedness of a neutral employment
                practice with adverse consequences. Systemic discrimination
                derives from how organizations, as structures discriminate."


73 A particular discriminatory practice or provision might often be insufficient
to expose the entire gamut of discrimination that a particular structure may
perpetuate. Exclusive reliance on tools of direct or indirect discrimination may
also not effectively account for patterns arising out of multiple axles of
discrimination. Therefore, a systemic view of discrimination, in perceiving
discriminatory disadvantage as a continuum, would account for not just unjust
action but also inaction71. Structures, in the form of organizations or otherwise,
would be probed for the systems or cultures they produce that influence day-to-
day interaction and decision-making.72 The duty of constitutional courts, when
confronted with such a scheme of things, would not just be to strike down the
discriminatory practices and compensate for the harm hitherto arising out of


70 Marie Mercat-Bruns, Systemic discrimination: Rethinking the Tools of Gender Equality, EUROPEAN EQUALITY
LAW REVIEW, Vol. 2 (European Commission, 2018) at p.5-6
71 Id. at p.10-13
72 Tristin K. Green, The Future of Systemic Disparate Treatment Law, BERKELEY JOURNAL OF EMPLOYMENT AND
LABOUR LAW, Vol. 32(2), 2011, 400-454

                                                                                               PART F

them; but also structure adequate reliefs and remedies that facilitate social re-
distribution by providing for positive entitlements that aim to negate the scope of
future harm.

74 The Supreme Court of Canada, in Action Travail des Femmes v.
Canadian National Railway Company73 analyzed the claim of woman seeking
equal employment opportunities in the National Railroad Company. In echoing
the mutually reinforcing consequences of direct and indirect discrimination within
organizational structures as a systemic feature, the Court noted74:

                "systemic discrimination in an employment context is
                discrimination that results from the simple operation of
                established procedures of recruitment, hiring and promotion,
                none of which is necessarily designed to promote
                discrimination. The discrimination is then reinforced by the
                very exclusion of the disadvantaged group because the
                exclusion fosters the belief, both within and outside the group,
                that the exclusion is a result of "natural forces", for example,
                that women "just can't do the job".....To combat systemic
                discrimination, it is essential to create a climate in which both
                negative practices and negative attitudes can be challenged
                and discouraged"

In prescribing remedies against systemic discrimination, the Court consciously
noted that the remedies do not have to be merely compensatory, but also
prospective in terms of the benefit that is designed to improve the situation in the
future. The Court structured the remedy as follows:

                "An employment equity program thus is designed to work in
                three ways. First, by countering the cumulative effects of
                systemic discrimination, such a program renders further
                discrimination pointless....
                Secondly, by placing members of the group that had
                previously been excluded into the heart of the work place and


73 "Canadian National Railway Company", (1987) 1 S.C.R. 1114
74 Id. at 1139

                                                                                               PART F

                by allowing them to prove ability on the job, the employment
                equity scheme addresses the attitudinal problem of
                stereotyping....
                Thirdly, an employment equity program helps to create what
                has been termed a "critical mass" of the previously excluded
                group in the work place. This "critical mass" has important
                effects. The presence of a significant number of individuals
                from a targeted group eliminates the problems of "tokenism"75.



This framework provided in Canadian National Railway Company (supra) was
followed by the Human Rights Tribunal of Canada, in the case of National
Capital Alliance on Race Relations v. Canada (Health and Welfare)76, wherein
the Court had to examine a case against the Health and Welfare Department of
Canada for discriminating against visible minorities by establishing employment
policies and practices that deprive visible minorities (race, colour and ethnic
origin) of employment opportunities in senior management. The Court conducted
a holistic analysis of the organization by collating testimonies of workers in the
organization and by engaging experts on statistical analysis and human resource
management. The evidence of the expert on human resources was analysed to
situate systemic issues ranging from ghettoization of minorities in Canada
translating into lesser encouragement for professional ambition. Societal impact
of discrimination was evidenced in the informal staffing decisions providing fertile
ground for unconscious bias and a broader perception of visible minorities as
unfit for management. In upholding the claims of the plaintiffs, corrective
measures were prescribed to counteract the effects of systemic discrimination in
the workforce.


75 Canadian National Railway Company (supra n. 74) at p.1143 to 1144
76 1997 28 C.H.R.R.D/179 (Canadian Human Rights Tribunal)

                                                                                               PART F

75 In the United States, the Supreme Court analysed a Title VII claim of
workers (represented by the Government) in a trucking company alleging pattern
and practice of employment discrimination against "Negroes and Spanish-
surnamed Americans" by failing to place them equally with whites in long-
distance, line-driver positions77. The Court noted certain legal principles that
could govern a claim of systemic disparate treatment and used a mixture of
statistical patterns with worker testimonies to arrive at a conclusion of systemic
discrimination:

                "Consideration of the question whether the company engaged
                in a pattern or practice of discriminatory hiring
                practices involves controlling legal principles that are relatively
                clear. The Government's theory of discrimination was simply
                that the company, in violation of s 703(a) of Title
                VII,14 regularly and purposefully treated Negroes and
                Spanish-surnamed Americans less favorably than white
                persons....The ultimate factual issues are thus simply whether
                there was a pattern or practice of such disparate treatment
                and, if so, whether the differences were "racially premised." ...
                As the plaintiff, the Government bore the initial burden of
                making out a prima facie case of discrimination. Albemarle
                Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 425, 95 S.Ct. 2362, 2375,
                45 L.Ed.2d 280; McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, supra,
                411 U.S., at 802, 93 S.Ct., at 1824. And, because it alleged
                a systemwide pattern or practice of resistance to the full
                enjoyment of Title VII rights, the Government ultimately
                had to prove more than the mere occurrence of isolated
                or "accidental" or sporadic discriminatory acts. It had to
                establish by a preponderance of the evidence that racial
                discrimination was the company's standard operating
                procedure the regular rather than the unusual practice....
                The Government bolstered its statistical evidence with the
                testimony of individuals who recounted over 40 specific
                instances of discrimination. Upon the basis of this testimony
                the District Court found that "(n)umerous qualified black and
                Spanish-surnamed American applicants who sought line
                driving jobs at the company over the years, either had their
                requests ignored, were given false or misleading information
                about requirements, opportunities, and application
                procedures, or were not considered and hired on the same
                basis that whites were considered and hired." Minority

77 International Brotherhood of Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 324 (1977)

                                                                                               PART F

                employees who wanted to transfer to line-driver jobs met with
                similar difficulties. The company's principal response to this
                evidence is that statistics can never in and of themselves
                prove the existence of a pattern or practice of discrimination,
                or even establish a prima facie case shifting to the employer
                the burden of rebutting the inference raised by the figures.
                But, as even our brief summary of the evidence shows, this
                was not a case in which the Government relied on "statistics
                alone." The individuals who testified about their personal
                experiences with the company brought the cold numbers
                convincingly to life."78
                                                             (emphasis supplied)

Therefore, once a petitioner could establish a prima facie case of discrimination
that did not occur as accidental or sporadic instances of conduct, it could prove
its case using statistical evidence, witness testimonies and other qualitative
methods to establish a preponderance of systemic discrimination.

76 In 1997, in the United Kingdom, Sir William Macpherson, a retired High
Court judge, was commissioned to study institutional racism in the police force.
This study was situated in the backdrop of the lacunae in the investigation of a
murder of Stephen Lawrence, a Black British teenager. The findings, publicized
as the "Macpherson Report" on 24 February 199979 concluded that the
investigation by the police was marred by incompetence and institutional racism.
The report studied prejudices within officers which fed into an institutional culture
as follows:

                "6.34....The collective failure of an organisation to provide an
                appropriate and professional service to people because of
                their colour, culture, or ethnic origin. It can be seen or
                detected in processes, attitudes and behaviour which amount
                to discrimination through unwitting prejudice, ignorance,

78 Id.at p. 334-340
79 The Stephen Lawrence Inquiry: Report of an Inquiry by Sir William Macpherson of Cluny (February 1999)
available at
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277111/4262.p
df#page=375

                                                                                               PART F

                thoughtlessness and racist stereotyping which disadvantage
                minority ethnic people. It persists because of the failure of the
                organisation openly and adequately to recognise and address
                its existence and causes by policy, example and leadership.
                Without recognition and action to eliminate such racism it can
                prevail as part of the ethos or culture of the organisation. It is
                a corrosive disease."

77 Therefore, an analysis of discrimination, with a view towards its systemic
manifestations (direct and indirect), would be best suited for achieving our
constitutional vision of equality and antidiscrimination. Systemic discrimination on
account of gender at the workplace would then encapsulate the patriarchal
disadvantage that permeates all aspects of her being from the outset, including
reproduction, sexuality and private choices which operate within an unjust
structure. In propounding this analysis, this Court is conscious of the practical
limitations of every framework to understanding workforces, considering the bulk
of litigation against systemic discrimination, would be from members of an
organized and formal workforce who would have the wherewithal and evidence of
patterns or practices to bolster their claims. For the laboring class in India, which
is predominantly constituted by members facing multiple axels of marginalization,
litigating their right to work with equality and dignity may be a distant dream.
However, it is our earnest hope, that a vision of systemic discrimination, would
aid members of even informal workforces who, in addition to battling precarity at
their places of work, will be able to assert a right to equality and dignity. A
framework that would situate their discrimination, against systemic societal
patterns of discrimination that are constituted and compounded by social and
economic structures, would help in addressing several fractures that are
contributing to inequality in our society.


                                                                                               PART G

78 In the dispute at hand, this Court is tasked with a duty to analyse the
implementation of its earlier directions in Babita Puniya (supra) that struck down
a directly discriminatory practice of excluding WSSCOs from PC. The petitioners'
claim of further discrimination in implementation, will have to be analyzed from
the framework of systemic discrimination (which encompasses indirect
discrimination), to determine a constitutional violation. In examining a retroactive
grant of PC, a study of the systemic impact of the prolonged denial of PC to
women and the evaluation structures and patterns therein, would be
indispensable.


G Analysis


79 The fundamental issue is whether the procedure which was followed in
evaluating the women SSCOs comports with the requirements of law. In arriving
at this determination, we will primarily be guided by the Army Orders, Army
Instructions and policy letters of the Union Government which have been set out
above and will be further explained below. At this stage, it needs to be
emphasized that the issue as regards the applicability of the SHAPE-1 criteria will
not be taken up in the first part of the analysis and will be dealt with
independently in a subsequent part of this judgment. With this clarification, we
proceed to outline the interplay between the Army instructions and policy letters.







                                                                                                                    PART G

G.1 Selection Process & Criteria set by the Army

(i) SAI/3S/70 set out the modalities for the grant of PC to serving SSCOs
          while making SSCOs eligible to apply for PC. This was inter alia subject to
          the conditions of eligibility spelt out in paragraph 2. These conditions of
          eligibility were

          a. An upper age limit of 27 years;

          b. Fulfillment of medical criteria; and

          c. Possession of technical qualifications as prescribed by officers
                    seeking PCs in the Corps of Engineers, Signals and EME. The Army
                    instruction provided for interviews by a Service Selection Board. All
                    officers who have been found suitable for the grant of PC would be
                    placed in a panel and the final decision would rest with the
                    government. Para 8b stipulated that the grant of PCs would depend
                    upon the vacancies existing in the arms or services and the
                    suitability of officers. The form of application at Appendix-A to the
                    Army Instruction inter alia stipulated the requirement of the applicant
                    being recommended by the Commanding Officer and the Brigade
                    Commander;

(ii) On 30 September 1983, the criteria for the grant of PC to SSCOs were
          formulated. The criteria envisaged that the Selection Board will assess
          each officer's performance on the basis of a computerized MDS. While the
          computerized evaluation would receive 80 per cent weightage, 20 per cent
          weightage would be given to the assessment of the members of the


                                                                                                                         PART G

          Selection Board. The Selection Board was also required to award a
          grading, besides awarding marks, on whether an officer was
          recommended for

          a. PC; or

          b. Extension; or

          c. In the alternate was rejected, deferred or withdrawn.

          Of the 80 marks earmarked for computerized evaluation, 60 marks were
          for the Quantitative Assessment of Performance (QAP), 6 for honours and
          awards, 10 for performance in courses and 4 for strong points. A candidate
          who was recommended for PC by the reporting officer in the ACR would
          get a '0' mark for "Yes" and 'minus 2' marks for "No". Minus marks were
          also be given for weak points.

(iii) On 24 February 2012, a policy letter was issued by the MoD to amend the
          weightage attributed to the computerised evaluation. This policy currently
          holds the field. The computerized evaluation was enhanced from 80 per
          cent to 95 per cent and the subjective evaluation of the members of the
          Selection Board No 5 was brought down from 20 to 5 per cent. The
          weightage of 95 per cent assigned to computer evaluation was distributed
          amongst QAP (75 marks), honours and awards (5 marks), sports and
          games (5 marks) and performance and courses (10 marks). The
          recommendation of the reporting officer in the ACR for grant of PC would
          carry '0' mark, while a negative recommendation carries minus '2' marks. It
          was envisaged that the marks quantified for overall performance would be


                                                                                               PART G

        obtained by cumulating the value judgment marks to the computerized
        evaluation. The marks so obtained would be used to draw out the overall
        merit of the officer. The minimum cut-off grade for SSCOs including
        women officers would be 60 per cent which could be reviewed every 2
        years;

(iv) AO 18/1988 contained provisions in regard to "system for selection for
        grant of permanent commission of SSCOs". Under para 8 of the AO it was
        envisaged that the first 50 per cent of officers screened by the Selection
        Board in the order of merit would be granted PC, the next 35 per cent
        would be granted extensions for another five years while the remaining 15
        per cent officers would be released on competing the contractual period of
        five years' service. Para 2 of the AO 18/1988, in other words, made it
        abundantly clear that while at one end of the spectrum 50 per cent of the
        officers in order of merit would be conferred with PC, at the other end of
        the spectrum only 15 per cent would be released on completing the
        contractual term. Between these two ends were officers (35 per cent) who
        were granted an extension of five years. AO 18/1988 specified in para 4,
        the constitution of the Selection Board which was to assess performance
        strictly in accordance with the laid down criteria. Under para 6 gradings
        were required to be assigned to the officers on whether or not they were
        recommended for PC or for extension or, in the alternative, to be deferred.
        Para 7 envisaged that the computer evaluation and assessment by
        members of the selection board would be based on ACRs, honours and
        awards, performance in courses, recommendations for PC, disciplinary


                                                                                      PART G

awards and strong and weak points. A minimum of three ACRs were
required as essential to consider the case of an officer for PC. Moreover,
the AO stipulated in paragraph 13 that "officers are assessed on the merits
of their service performance as reflected in the ACRs and not by the
reports filed in the CR dossier". Further, while evaluating the ACRs, the
possibility of subjective/inflated reporting and fluctuation in performance of
officers were taken note of by, inter alia, stipulating that the last ACR
before assessment for PC would be taken into consideration. The Army
Order also clarified in para 13(e) that the low medical category of the
officers would not influence the assessment as it is an administrative
restriction and not a criteria for assessment. Moreover, para 21 spelt out
the medical requirements (to be considered subsequently in this
judgment). Para 23 stipulated that those who are not selected for PC but
are otherwise fit and suitable would be granted an extension of five years
beyond the initial term of five years on the expiry of which they would be
released from the Army. This is how the SSC engagement (at that time)
came to be described as an engagement for 5+5 years. Persons in the
PMLC who could not be granted PC would be allowed to continue in
service for a full extended tenure of 5 years beyond the initial tenure of 5
years (Para 26). Moreover, under para 34, it was stipulated that SSCOs
would be screened only once in the 5th year of service by a selection board
for PC. However, in certain circumstances, a special review for the grant of
PC was envisaged;


                                                                                               PART G

(v) On 15 January 1991, MoD issued a policy letter capping the number of
        vacancies per year for PC at 250. The minimum acceptable cut-off grade
        for the grant of PC to SSCOs is 60 per cent which would be reviewed
        every two years. In the event that more officers, in excess of the ceiling of
        250 fulfill the cut - off grade of 60 per cent, the requisite number of 250
        officers would be granted PC in competitive merit. All officers, irrespective
        of the grant of PC, would be given an extension of 5 years, unless they opt
        out or are considered unfit for retention; and

(vi) MoD's Policy Letters dated 20 July 2006 provided that SSCOs both in the
        technical and non-technical branch would have a tenure of 14 years - the
        initial 10 years, extendable by 4 years. Moreover, serving WSES officers
        were given an option to seek SSC within a period of six months.


80 Now, in the backdrop of the above analysis it becomes necessary to
evaluate the methodology which has been followed while considering 615 women
SSCOs across several batches for the belated grant of PC, by the constitution of
a special board.

G.2 Benchmarking with the Lowest Male Officer

81 The first aspect to be considered in relation to the assessment criteria
provided in the General Instructions dated 1 August 2020 is the bench-marking of
the marks awarded to WSSCOs with the lowest placed male officer of the
corresponding batch. In the course of his submissions, the ASG has argued that
"there is a considerable rationale in assessing the women officers on the basis of


                                                                                               PART G

their first 5/10 years of service (as the case may be) and keeping the above
benchmark [that is, for bench-marking them with the lowest selected male officer
of the corresponding batch]". The rationale which the ASG put forth can be
summarized as follows:
(i) The cut-off of 60 per cent marks is only a criterion of eligibility for
        considering officers for the grant of PC. This is a minimum cut-off grade
        applicable both to men and women officers. Securing 60 per cent in itself,
        which is a threshold criteria, does not automatically entitle an officer to the
        grant of PC;
(ii) Since 1991, an upper ceiling of 250 vacancies per year for PC was
        prescribed. The number of candidates above the 60 per cent cut-off,
        amongst whom the selection for PC would be made, will fluctuate from
        year to year and hence "the marks of the 250th candidate automatically
        becomes a benchmark";
(iii) In the present case, while implementing the judgment of this Court in
        Babita Puniya (supra) dated 17 February 2020, the upper limit of 250
        vacancies was dispensed with for women officers in order to ensure that
        no WSSCO who is found eligible on merits and qualified in terms of the
        medical criterion is denied PC for want of vacancy;
(iv) The decision in Babita Puniya (supra) required the Army authorities to
        offer PC to the WSSCOs at par with their male counterparts. AO 18/1988
        had initially stipulated that 50 per cent of the officers falling in the order of
        merit would be granted PC, 35 per cent would be granted an extension of
        5 years and 15 per cent would be released on completing the contractual


                                                                                                     PART G

         period of 5 years of service. This governed the earlier regime of SSCOs
         under which SSCOs were recruited for 5 years and were granted an
         extension of 5 years. This regime was modified in 2004 when a second
         extension option up to four years was introduced making it 5+5+4. In 2006,
         the above regime was revised by the Policy Letter dated 20 July 2006 by
         MoD, the effect of which was that the SSC regime of 5+5+4 was
         substituted by a regime of 10+4;
(v) The policy decision of MoD dated 15 January 1991 indicated a cap of 250
         SSCOs for the annual grant of PC; a minimum cut-off grade of 60 per cent,
         and in case more than the specified number of officers make the grade,
         only 250 would be granted PC on competitive merit;
(vi) Even for male officers, the statistics pertaining to 32 batches would
         indicate that 67.86 per cent were granted PC and hence there is no
         discrimination against women SSCOs; and
(vii) In the absence of an upper ceiling of vacancies, the field would be left
         open for any number of WSSCOs to get PC. To avoid this, a benchmark
         had to be fixed. The need for fixing a benchmark is indisputable though
         any benchmark has to satisfy the test of being rational and of not being
         arbitrary. If two views are possible, the view which has been adopted by
         the Army authorities must be given preference. Benchmarking the aspirant
         WSSCOs with the lowest of their male counterparts on merit is an
         objective criterion.

82 The fundamental postulate in the submissions of the ASG is that since
there is a cut-off of 250 vacancies per year for the grant of PC to SSCOs and a


                                                                                               PART G

minimum of 60 per cent is fixed as the cut-off grade by the Policy Letter dated 15
January 1991 of the MoD, the evaluation of competitive merit is necessary.
Though, the WSSCOs in the present case were not subjected to any ceiling of
vacancies as a one-time measure, benchmarking (in the submission) became
necessary to place them at par with their male counterparts.

83 There is a fundamental fallacy in the entire line of reasoning which has
been advanced by the Army authorities both in the counter affidavit as well as in
the written submissions of the ASG. The Policy Letter dated 15 January 1991
indicates that
(i) A maximum of 250 SSCOs will be granted PC annually;
(ii) A minimum cut-off grade 60 per cent is fixed, which is reviewable every
        two years;
(iii) In case more than 250 officers fulfill the cut-off grade of 60 per cent, only
        250 would be granted PC on competitive merit; and
(iv) Other than non-optees and those unfit for retention, all others would be
        granted an extension of 5 years.

84 The clear intent of the policy letter is that the issue of applying competitive
merit arises only if more than 250 officers fulfill the cut-off grade annually. If the
number of officers who achieved the 60 per cent cut-off is less than 250, then
evidently there is no requirement of assessing inter se competitive merit among
the officers who meet the minimum threshold.




                                                                                               PART G

85 In the present case, there are a total of 615 women officers for
consideration, across several batches. As many as 32 batches were under
consideration. Annexure WR-6 to the written submissions of the Union of India
carries the details of PC granted to male officers. The table is extracted below:



                                                                                               PART G


86 The above table has been filed by the ASG as a part of his submissions, to
counter the contention of the women officers that whereas most male officers


                                                                                                                         PART G

have been granted PC, the number of women officers is abysmally low. The
above chart provides for

(i) The number of male officers passing out;
(ii) The number of male officers granted PC; and
(iii) The percentage of those granted PC under (ii) as a proportion of the
              officers passing out in (i).

87 The chart, however, suppresses an important feature which is the number
of officers who had not opted for being considered for PC (described in the
parlance as 'non-optees"). In other words, the percentage of male officers
granted PC has been computed in the chart without disclosing the factual details
of the number of male officers who had not opted for PC. Only when the number
of "optees" is considered against the "non-optees", can the percentage of male
officers who were successfully granted PC be accurately determined. This is a
significant omission on the part of the Army authorities from which an adverse
interference must be drawn. However there is another and more fundamental
aspect which emerges from the disclosure which has been made in the above
chart by the Army authorities. The chart indicates the number of officers who
were granted PC during the course of the selections which took place twice every
year. A close reading of the data would show that in a number of years, the male
officers who were granted PC was far lower than the ceiling of 250 vacancies
prescribed by the policy letter of the MoD dated 15 January 1991. The table
below, which is prepared on the basis of the above chart of the Union of India,
computes the number of male officers granted PC between 1994 and 2010:


                                                                                               PART G

      Year of Commission No. of Officers granted Total Officers granted
                                    PC PC in one year
      1994 77 + 106 183
      1995 90 + 67 157
      1996 113+ 96 209
      1997 23 + 178 201
      1998 85 + 120 205
      1999 141 + 166 307
      2000 114 + 159 273
      2001 141 + 161 302
      2002 108 + 95 203
      2003 95 + 115 210
      2004 107 + 168 275
      2005 138 + 168 306
      2006 175 + 156 331
      2007 132 + 133 265
      2008 128 + 87 215
      2009 87 + 117 204
      2010 77 77


88 The statistics which have been advanced by the Army authorities disclose
two things. Firstly, in a number of years between 1994 and 2010, the ceiling limit
of 250 had not been crossed. If the ceiling limit of 250 had not been crossed, the
justification which has been offered for benchmarking women officers against the


                                                                                               PART G

lowest male officers of the corresponding batch turns out to be specious and a
red-herring. Evidently, in their anxiety to rebut the submission of the petitioners in
regard to the disparity in the percentage of male and female officers granted PC,
the statistics which have been placed on the record, completely demolish the
case for benchmarking. It is also necessary to understand is that in many years
the ceiling of 250 officers was not met and the number of officers that were
granted PC were below 250, the question of evaluating officers on the basis of
inter se competitive merit did not arise. This leads us to the second important
aspect, which is, that in certain years such as 1999, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2005,
2006 and 2007, the ceiling of 250 was crossed for the male officers. This again
belies the claim that benchmarking is crucial to maintain the integrity of
competitive merit for grant of PC, as envisaged by the Policy Letter dated 15
January 1991. The data, in fact, shows that in several years, the ceiling was
crossed, which is an indicator of the fact that it has not been applied as a rigid
norm.

89 Bearing this in mind, we note the submission of the ASG that for the
present year, while implementing the judgment of this Court in Babita Puniya
(supra) the ceiling of 250 vacancies was not applied as a one-time measure. This
further demolishes the so-called rationale for benchmarking which has been
offered by the ASG. For the above reason, there can be no manner of doubt
whatsoever that the attempt to apply the benchmark of the lowest selected male
officer is a ruse to deviate from the judgment of the Court and to bypass the
legitimate claim of the WSSCOs. This benchmarking becomes particularly


                                                                                               PART G

problematic, when coupled with the manner in which the reliance on ACRs was
made.

G.3 Reliance on Annual Confidential Reports

90 The next aspect which needs to be analysed is the grievance of the
women officers on the reliance placed on their ACRs for determining the grant of
PC. The WSSCOs claim that when their ACRs were being written, women who
had been appointed on SSC were not entitled to PC and hence their ACRs were
written in a casual manner. Now, the narration of the Army Orders and
instructions adverted to earlier, demonstrates that the recommendation of the
Commanding Officer and the Brigade Commander was necessary for evaluating
an officer for the grant of PC. This was reiterated in MoD's Policy Letter dated 30
September 1983, AO 18 /1988 and MoD's Policy Letter dated 24 February 2012.
The MoD Policy Letter dated 24 February 2012, for instance, clearly specifies the
requirement that in every ACR, where the officer has been recommended for PC
by the reporting officer, he will be awarded '0' mark, and where he has not been
recommended for PC, he will be awarded minus 2 marks. Now, it is an
indisputable position that since WSSCOs were not entitled to the grant of PC, this
part of the ACRs was invariably left blank.

91 In this context, Army Order 45 of 200180 dated 31 December 2001 inter
alia stipulated in para 124 that "communicating the relevant portions of the
assessment by first level of reporting officers, is one of the basic principles for
achieving objectivity in the system of reporting". Para 125(c) specifically


80 AO 45/2001/MS- Confidential Reports on Officers

                                                                                               PART G

stipulated that "when ratee is Not Recommended for Promotion or Not
Recommended for Permanent Regular Commission/Extension for Short Service
Commissioned Officers", even then the assessment by the second or higher-level
rank officer must be disclosed. The reasons and justification were to be
communicated along with the pen picture to the officer reported upon. On the
other hand, it has been accepted by the Army authorities that the ACRs of the
WSSCOs on the aspect of the recommendation for PC were left blank for the
simple reason that these officers were not being considered for the grant of PC.
As a matter of fact, even as late as 23 October 2020, a communication has been
addressed by the Secretary Military Branch, Integrated Headquarters of MoD
(Army) in the following terms:

           "A/17151/5/MS 4 CR Policy 23 Oct 2020
           HQ
                Southern Comd (MS)
                Eastern Comd (MS)
                Western Comd (MS)
                Central Comd (MS)
                Northern Comd (MS)
                ARTRAC (MS)
                South Western Comd (MS)
                SFC (MS)
                IDS (MS & SD)
                ANC (MS)
           ENDORSEMENT OF RECOMMENDATION FOR PERMT COMMISSION IN
           CRs FOR WOMEN OFFRS

       1. As per instrs issued vide ADG PS/ AG's Br Letter No PC 32313/PC to
           Women offr/Admn Instrs/AG/ PS-2(a) dt 30 Jul 20, women offrs of the IA will
           hereinafter be considered for permt commission in all Arms/services. The
           same necessitates endorsement of specific recoms (Yes/ No) wrt grant
           of permt commission by Reporting Offrs in CRs of women offrs. It has
           however been obs that Reporting offrs are still erroneously endorsing 'NA' in
           the CR coln related to the same.
       2. Above in view, in accordance with instrs above, it is clarified that Reporting
           Offrs will mandatorily endorse either 'YES' or 'NO' in the coln of
           "Recommendation for Permt Commission" in CRs of all women offrs.


                                                                                               PART G

       3. The above may pl be disseminated to all concerned for compliance."

This indicates that as recently as in October 2020, the same problem of the
ACRs of WSSCOs not being endorsed with the recommendation continued to
persist. The ASG submitted that this structural problem was corrected by treating
all the WSSCOs in the present batch of 615 officers to be recommended for the
grant of PC. However, the issue is not confined merely to WSSCOs not being
recommended for PC in their ACRs, but instead relates to the broader aspect
which permeated the whole process of ACR writing for women.

92 WSSCOs, unlike their male counterparts, were not eligible for being
considered PC in the 5th / 10th year of their service. The grievance is that the
reporting officers treated these WSSCOs differently while writing their ACRs as
compared to their male counterparts who were eligible for the grant of PC. For
instance, a document titled "Ready Reckoner for Initiating/Reviewing/Endorsing
the Confidential Reports, Unit Assessment Cards and Non Initiation Reports"81
states that in the case of women special entry officers, a recommendation for
extension is mandatory. Evidently WSSCOs were being treated differently for the
reason that they were not eligible for the grant of PC. Following the decision of
this Court in Babita Puniya (supra), a study group was constituted by the
Integrated Headquarters of MoD (Army) on 2 March 2020 to carry out a "Holistic
Appraisal of Induction and Employment of Women Officers in Indian Army"82. In
this context, the communication dated 2 March 2020, has taken note of the fact

81 Ref MS Br Letter No A/17151/MS 4 (Coord) dated 20 February 2004, provided that:
"(o) In case of Short Service Commissioned Officers, recommendations for 'PRC/Extension' are mandatory. In
case of Women Special Entry Scheme Officers, recommendation for 'Extension' is mandatory. Reasons for 'Not
Recommended' should be communicated to the Ratee."
82 Ref Letter No B/32313/Road Map/AG/PS-2(a) dated 2 March 2020

                                                                                               PART G

that career progression for women officers in terms of their being assigned for
Army courses and posting exposure was limited as a result of an option for PC
not being available. Noting this anomaly, the document records:

                "11. Career Progression. The 'in service' career
                progression of WOs in terms of detailment for Army courses
                and posting exposures etc is presently limited keeping in view
                that option for PC and further career prog was NA. The same
                will now need to be aligned to male offrs so as to place them
                on equal footing to compete for Nos 5, No 3 and other SBs.
                The Study Gp would be required to delve upon this issue in
                details and may also review the list of male courses
                applicable for WOs."

The above communication which has been issued by Lt. General SK Saini, Vice
Chief of Army Staff states that it has the approval of the COAS. The observation
in the communication in regard to the limited posting opportunities which were
available to women officers is borne out by an earlier communication83 dated 30
December 2003 of the Military Secretary Branch, Army Headquarters which
records that the posting of women officers in "soft field and peace stations is
affecting the posting profile of their male counterparts". Consequently, specific
directions were issued for the posting of women officers at appointments in
peace regions as well as in formations in the field.

93 The above factors must be coupled with the following circumstances,
which must be borne in mind while considering the remedial steps necessary to
rectify the discrimination which has been suffered by the WSSCOs:
(i) The number of vacancies which were available for the grant of PCs in the
        batches for which the WSSCOs were being considered over the years has


83 Ref Letter No 04520/MS Policy dated 30 December 2003

                                                                                                                    PART G

          not been disclosed while processing the claims for the grant of PC. As
          noted earlier, in many cases, the upper ceiling of 250 officers to be
          granted PC was not met and in some years, this limit was breached. If, as
          suggested by the tabulated statement produced by the ASG in the written
          submissions, vacancies were available, the criteria of meeting the
          benchmarking of the lowest male selected officer is evidently irrational and
          arbitrary. This rationale, while touted as a manner of including competitive
          merit, was ignorant of the structural discrimination that was faced by
          women officers whose ACRs were casually graded, even when compared
          to the least meritorious male officer in their corresponding batch;
(ii) In the case of male officers, the process of conducting the Special No. 5
          Selection Board for considering the grant of PC is initiated by issuing an
          order declaring the date of the Board in advance so that the preceding
          three ACRs can be taken into consideration to assess the performance of
          the officer for the grant of PC. An officer has the option to seek remedial
          measures before the redressal mechanism to espouse any adverse entry
          in the ACR. This process has not been followed in the case of the
          WSSCOs before the Special No. 5 Selection Board was conducted. As an
          illustration for this, the petitioners have relied on a communication dated
          17 January 2020 of the Integrated Headquarters of MoD (Army) which
          specifically states as follows:


                               "Initiation and Despatch of CRs
                               14 The cut off CR for consideration by No 5 SB is 31
                               Oct 2019 vide AO 4512001/MS as amended CO/OC
                               will ensure that CR for the year 2018-19 is forwarded


                                                                                                                         PART G

                                in time in the correct format, vide AO 45/2001/MS as
                                amended, and should reach MS Branch (respective
                                CR library) within specified time Intermediate
                                formation HQs should ensure that the CRs/Spl CR is
                                initiated/endorsed for timely submission Also ensure
                                Spl CR (if initiated) reaches concerned CR Library on
                                or before 31 Mar 2020"

(iii) In the counter affidavit which has been filed by the Col. Military Secretary
          (Legal) it has been specifically admitted that:

                                "15...it is submitted that women officers were
                                considered by No 5 SB in 5th and or 10th year for
                                extension of service only. The criteria of medical
                                fitness for grant of permanent commission and grant
                                of Extension of service are entirely different. No SSC
                                officer has ever been denied extension of service due
                                to medical reasons. Therefore, the contention that
                                since the petitioners were found medically fit at 5th or
                                10th year of service, as the case may be, when they
                                were considered for extension of service, they should
                                be now considered as fit for grant of permanent
                                commission, are baseless." (emphasis supplied)

          Women officers were considered by Special No. 5 Selection Board in their
          5th and/or 10th year of service for extension of service only. In other words,
          Selection Board 5 was for extension and PC, but the women officers were
          granted only extensions because the option of PC was not available;

(iv) The ratio between the marks assigned to computer evaluation and the
          value judgment marks assigned by the members of the Board was initially
          pegged at 80:20 as on 30 September 1983. This came to be altered on 24
          February 2012 by MoD's Policy Letter to 95:5. In the written submissions
          tendered by the ASG it has been argued that :






                                                                                               PART G

                         "21. As per Annexure R-5 (page 122-132) [MoD Policy Letter
                         dated 30 September 1983], the quantified profile marks are to
                         be given out of 80, while the marks for value-judgment are to
                         be given out of 20. Juxtaposed, as per Annexure R-6 (page
                         133-144) [MoD Policy Letter dated 24 February 2012], the
                         same are to be given in the ratio of 95:05 (Please see page
                         134). Depending upon their batch, the petitioners and
                         other similarly placed women SSC officers were
                         assessed either under Annexure R-5 or under Annexure
                         R-6, as was done in the case of their male counterparts
                         as well." (emphasis supplied)

        The above submission indicates that while with effect from 30 September
        1983, the value judgment marks were graded out of 20, it was
        subsequently brought down to 5 marks on 24 December 2012. The above
        extract indicates that the petitioners and other similarly situated WSSCOs
        were assessed either under the 30 September 1983 norm or as the case
        may be the 24 February 2012 norm, depending on their batch. The
        inherent lack of fairness is evident from the fact that the value judgment
        marks which were assessed for their male counterparts were by a different
        Special Board 5 in distinction to the Special Board which considered the
        case of the WSSCOs. There is a subjectivity inherent in value judgment
        marks which is the reason for bringing them down from 20 to 5. The issue
        is exacerbated in the case of the WSSCOs involved in the present case
        because the marks for value judgment have been assigned by a
        completely distinct Board;

(v) It has been admitted in the counter-affidavit that the confidential reports,
        discipline and vigilance reports if any, and honours and awards as on the
        5th or 10th years of service were considered in the case of the women
        officers. As a consequence of this, the qualifications, achievements and


                                                                                               PART G

        performance of women officers after the 5th or 10th year of service (as the
        case may be) have been ignored. At this stage, it is necessary to note that
        para 13(b) of AO 18/1988 specifically contemplates the "last ACR before
        assessment for PC" being taken into reckoning for grant of PC. Similarly
        MoD's Policy Letter dated 24 February 2012 specifically contemplates that
        in evaluating the overall performance of the officer, "the average will be
        worked out for each year as well as for the entire period of officers'
        services". Para 4(a) stipulates thus:

                         "(a) QAP: Overall performance of the officer is evaluated by
                         taking the average of figurative assessment of all reporting
                         officers other than FTO and HTO. Average will be worked
                         out for each year as well as for the entire period of
                         officers service. The latter QAP will be converted into a
                         proportion of 75 marks." (emphasis supplied)


        In spite of the above clear stipulations, it is now an admitted position that
        the distinguished record of the WSSCOs beyond the 5th/10thyear of service
        has been disregarded. The laurels achieved by them in the service of the
        nation after the 5th/10th year of service have been ignored;

(vi) It has been submitted on affidavit that even women officers who have
        been awarded the prestigious commendation card from the COAS have
        been denied PC. As an example it has been stated that Lt. Col. Shikha
        Yadav (as well as several other women officers) have been denied PC
        though they have been awarded the COAS commendation. Lt. Col. Tashi
        Thapliyal was awarded the Vishisht Seva Mandal. Several women officers
        who have served in UN Missions overseas have been denied PC. There
        are women officers who have excelled in national sports events,

                                                                                                     PART G

         exemplified by Major Pallavi Sharma who has a proven track record inter
         alia in shooting championships which has been ignored84;


(vii) In IA 12148 of 2020 in Writ Petition (C) 1172 of 2020 (Lt. Col. Sonia
         Anand v. Union of India), a detailed chart has been annexed indicating
         illustrations of women achievers who have been denied PC. At the cost of
         enlarging the size of this judgment, it becomes necessary to highlight the
         tabulated statement. The facts which have been set-forth before the Court
         have not been denied during the course of the submissions of the ASG :

                          "Illustrations: Women Officer Achievers who have been denied
                           Permanent Commission.

                           Name Lt Col Anuja Yadav
                           Course WS 12
                           Arms Engineers
                           Achievements First Women officer of an
                                                           Engineering Regiment.
                                                           First Indian Woman to be
                                                           selected for a UN Mission as a
                                                           Military Observer
                                                           Instructor in College of Military
                                                           English
                                                           Engineer in Charge of Op Wks
                                                           active formation
                                                           Outstanding ACRs
                                                           COAS Commendation Card 01
                                                           GOC in C Commendation Card
                                                           02 Nos
                           Remarks Selected for UN Mission based on
                                                           initial 6 years ACR

                           Name Lt Col Archana Sood
                           Course WS 15
                           Arms Engineers
                           Achievements  First Woman Officer to be
                                                               posted to 7 Engineer
                                                               Regiment, Madras Sappers.

84 We cite these examples only to reflect the outstanding nature of the service of WSSCOs. We do so in full
recognition of the fact that that these instances merely constitute a drop in the ocean of the contribution of
women officers in the Armed Forces.

                                                                                                                                                 PART G

                                                                  Topper of Geographic
                                                                        information officers course.
                                                                        Felicitated with a trophy by
                                                                        Engineer in Chief for best
                                                                        student in 2002. 'A' grading in
                                                                        Geographic and Information
                                                                        and remote sensing course
                                                                        from CDAC Pune in 2004.
                                                                  Shape 1, Mandatory courses
                                                                        JC qualified
                                                                  First Woman Officer to be
                                                                        handpicked and posted to
                                                                        cops of Military Police as
                                                                        Second in Command of an
                                                                        Infantry Division Provost Unit
                                                                        as a part of a pilot project in
                                                                        2016 before inducting women
                                                                        jawans in mil police.
                                                                  First Woman Officer to be
                                                                        posted as Garrison Engineer
                                                                        of an Engineer Park which
                                                                        holds over 21000 tons of
                                                                        operational stores and is
                                                                        responsible for its
                                                                        maintenance, upkeep and
                                                                        issue on the Western front.
                                                                  Instructor tenures in Cat A and
                                                                        Cat B training establishments.
                                                                  Called to appear for interviews
                                                                        to UN missions twice in
                                                                        service, based on first seven
                                                                        CRs.
                                                                  Qualification: BE(Civ), Domain
                                                                        knowledge, survey and remote
                                                                        sensing.
                                                                  Served in operational area,
                                                                        Counter Insurgency Ops (J&K)

Remarks

Name Lt Col Julee
Course WS 26
Arms AAD
Achievements 1. Trained first batch of Women
                                                                        constables for Assam Rifles
                                                                        2014-16 who are doing well
                                                                        and have been employed in J
                                                                        and K off late.
                                                                2. Handpicked to train first batch


                                                                                                                                                 PART G

                                                                        of Women Mil Police soldiers
                                                                        for Indian Army who are under
                                                                        training at CMP centre and
                                                                        school [B]ang[a]lore..
                                                                3. Participated in active CI by
                                                                        doing incident free ROP in
                                                                        Anantnag district during hot
                                                                        scenario of stone pelting in
                                                                        2016-17 where I got
                                                                        downgraded medically due to
                                                                        strenous(sic) type of field
                                                                        working involving lives of
                                                                        troops.
                                                                4. Participated in active ops post
                                                                        Uri attack with Unit.
                                                                5. Got COAS commendation in
                                                                        Jan 17 for Assam Rifles.
                                                                6. GOC in C SC on the spot
                                                                        commendation for work
                                                                        execution in COVID.
                                                                7. Have done all mandatory
                                                                        courses incl LGSC and JC

Remarks Two tenures of J and K and one
                                                                Nagaland as my field service.

Name Lt Col Gopika Bhati
Course WS 10
Achievements Qual
                                                                BA (Hons)

                                                                1. Only off[ice]r to receive GOC-
                                                                in-C Commendation Card for
                                                                rendering emergency duties in
                                                                Northern Command sector in the
                                                                year 2016.

                                                                2. Active participation in 'OP
                                                                Cloud burst': Rescued lives of
                                                                foreign and Indian nationals.

                                                                3. 'OP Parakram'

                                                                4. 'OP Vijay'

                                                                5. 'OP Rakshak'

                                                                6. High Altitude Area HAA and
                                                                OC 'R' Centre Leh


                                                                                                                                                 PART G


                                                                7. Cl Ops Area and DAAG of
                                                                Infantry Division in Cl Ops

                                                                8. Northern and North-East sector

                                                                9. Represented India in Lawn
                                                                Tennis

                                                                10. National level Squash player

                                                                11. National level Tennis player

                                                                12. Recipient of 'Award of
                                                                Appreciation' for sports by Govt.
                                                                of India

                                                                13. Recognition by Hon'ble
                                                                Supreme Court and Indian Media
Remarks Service profile is mainly towards
                                                                operations and challenging duties
                                                                outside comfort zone and in
                                                                forefront with troops in step with
                                                                male counterparts throughout the
                                                                service of 23 years.

Name Lt Col Saras Handa
Course WSES(O)- 05
Arm AOC
Achievements 1. Only Lady Off[icer] to be
                                                                        detailed for UAV logisticians'
                                                                        course in Israel.
                                                                 2. Participated in Op Vijay and
                                                                        Op Parakram.
                                                                 3. Posted in CI/Hard Fd/HAA
                                                                        areas like Masimpur,
                                                                        Leimakhong, Leh, Bari
                                                                        Brahmana.
                                                                 4. One of the first lady off[icer] to
                                                                        be detailed for Advanced
                                                                        Materials Management course
                                                                        (TSS) at CMM Jabalpur.
                                                                 5. Instrumental in raising the
                                                                        Provision branch of Avn depot.
                                                                 5. Proficient in French language.
                                                                        Undertook assignments at
                                                                        French language instructor in
                                                                        AFLC, Delhi Cantt (IHQ of
                                                                        MoD, MT 15).


                                                                      PART G

                               6. Included in the IHQ pool of
                                   foreign linguistic pool.
                               7. Participated in Marathons in
                                   High Altitude Area (Leh).
                               8. A polyglot, double Masters in
                                   Microbiology and English,
                                   MBA and a Bachelor's in Law.
Remarks Four ERE assignments, two with
                               EME, One with Avn and Current
                               with Edn.

                               Five Field postings including
                               Counter insurgency and High
                               Altitude areas.

                               Volunteered for Siachen.

Name Lt Col Nisha Rani
Course WS 18
Arms AOC
Achievements 1. Awarded with Army Cdr
                                   Commendation Card, SWC
                               2. Served as Administrative
                                   Off[ice]r in CI ops
                               3. Served in ERE with Army
                                   Aviation Corps
                               4. Been part of National
                                   Integration Camps
                               5. 2 units awarded with Best
                                   DOU while serving as OIC,
                                   Inventory Control Wing
                               6. Participated in EWTs (5
                                   exercise)
Remarks

Name Lt Col Navneet Khangura
Course WS 15
Arms Signals
Achievements Qual
                               BTech (pre comm)
                               MTech (Done myself from BITS
                               Pilani in 2 years online classes
                               but proper physical semester
                               exams subject - SOFTWARE
                               SYSTEMS)

                               1. First WO Posted to an Infantry
                                   Division Signal Regiments
                               2. First WO Posted to an

                                                                      PART G

                                   Armoured Division Signal
                                   Regiment
                               3. First to be selected for UN
                                   Mission as Military Observer
                               4. Instructor Class B at Military
                                   College of Telecommunication
                                   Engineering
                               5. Instructor Class A at Military
                                   College of Telecommunication
                                   Engineering
                               6. All outstanding ACR
                               7. Participated in Op Parakaram
                               8. Done a tenure in CI (Ops) at
                                   Jorhat (Assam)
                               9. Domain Expertise - Cyber
                                   Security -: Three years posted
                                   as System Manager at Army
                                   Cyber Group handling Cyber
                                   Audits of Army HQ and PAN
                                   India Command HQs, Cyber
                                   Forensics, CERT - Even
                                   present website of CERT -
                                   Army made by Lt Col Navneet
                                   Khangura

Remarks Selected for UN Mission based on
                               CRs of first 4 years of her service

Name Lt Col Poonam Sharda
Course WS 19 (Mar 2002)
Arms Intelligence Corps
Achievements 1. First lady off[ice]r served in CI
                                   unit - 21 CIIU Doda under D
                                   force which is equivalent to an
                                   RR tenure for int off[ice]r
                               2. First lady off[ice]r from whom
                                   PIT for lady off[ice]r as well
                                   as for int offer started
                               3. Satellite imagery interpreter
                                   for last eight years
                               4. Only lady off[ice]r in Int corps
                                   who is interrogation cadre
                                   qualified
Remarks

Name Lt Col Preena Verma
Course WS21 (08 Mar 2003)
Arms Engineers


                                                                      PART G

Achievements 1. LLB Officer commissioned in
                                   Corp of Engineers
                               2. First woman officer to be
                                   posted with Border Road
                                   Organisation in Corp of
                                   Engineers in 2003
                               3. Silver medal in First Asian
                                   White Water River Rafting
                                   Championship in Sept 2003
                               4. Goc in c -D1
                               5. Handled law and Dv cases of
                                   MES throughout 17 yrs in Cort
                                   of Engineers
Remarks

Name Vanita Dhaka
Course WS09
Arms EME
Achievements 1. Topped the degree course
                                   and got DGEME best all
                                   rounder officer trophy. First
                                   lady off[icer] to achieve this
                                   with inst grading
                               2. Done specialized course. TO
                                   course (psychologist)
                                   assessor and was done
                                   tenures at Selection centre
                                   Bangalore and Kapurthala.
                               3. Presently posted at SI trg of a
                                   cat A est Institute of National
                                   Integration as a psychologist
                               4. Passed out with Gold medal
                                   from OTA
                               5. Obtained 'A' grading in YO's
                               6. Called for interview to UN
                                   Msn in Ethiopia & Eritrea
                                   (UNMEE) in 2005.
Remarks

Name Maj Garima Gulati
Course SS - 01
Arms Sigs
Achievements 1. 'A' grading in SODE course.
                               2. 'A' grading in MLIT course
                               3. Citation sent for COAS
                                   commendation card
                               4. Participated in EWT and all
                                   Exercises within one year of


                                                                      PART G

                                   svc as part of 18 IDSR (A)
                               5. Served in CI area from Dec
                                   2013 till Jun 2016
Remarks All Outstanding ACR for last 3
                               years

Name Lt Col Ritu Srivastava
Course WS 12
Arms  AOC
Achievements 1. Goc in C Commendation card
                                   - 01
                               2. GSO 1 tr[ainin]g at ADC
                                   reg[imen]t Centre
                               3. Did 5 important appointments.
                                   (AE), All Outstanding AE
                                   reports from IO
                               4. Awarded Van Prahari from
                                   Rajasthan State Govt
                               5. Qualified in computer course
                                   from CDAC, Disaster
                                   management from NIDM,
                                   MBA in supply chain
                                   management
                               6. Prov n proc off[ice]r of two
                                   biggest tech COD
                               7. Subject matter expert in
                                   civilian personnel
                                   management
                               8. Participated in Op Parakaram
                                   and Op Rakshak

Remarks

Name Lt Col Sonali Singh
Course WS 14 (04 September 1999)
Arms Army Service Corps
Achievements 1.First WO of HQ 21 Sub Area to
                               be the convoy cdr for Pathankot
                               to Leh convoy in the year 1999
                               with a strength of 50xALS/10
                               tonner approx.

                               2.First WO to be the sole Officer-
                               in-Charge of Ammunition dump,
                               Valla (Amritsar) during OP
                               Parakram.

                               3.Was appointed the first AAG of


                                                                      PART G

                               HQ 84 Inf Bde and was
                               responsible for segregating the
                               duties of A and Q branch.

                               4.First WO to be appointed as
                               SSO(Land) in St[atio]n HQ
                               Mamun and handled legal cases
                               pertaining to army land,
                               arbitration cases, hiring of land in
                               consultation with civil
                               administration.

                               5.Selected as Ad[ministrative]
                               officer of Sainik School.
Remarks One tenure of J&K and one
                               tenure of Nagaland as my F[iel]d
                               service.

Name Major Pallavi Sharma
Course SS 02 (19 SEP 2009)
Arms EME
Achievements 1.Served in Cl area (03years)

                               2.and Op Parakarm. Led the adv
                               party of the DOU to the fwd area
                               during Op Vijay. 3,). Got an
                               Outstanding in the unit. Selected
                               at AMU (Army marksmanship
                               unit)
                               International participation
                               Represented Indian shooting
                               team at Czech Republic and
                               Hannover, Germany (2019)
                               Represented Services team at
                               35th National games
                               Represented Army in over 20
                               National level championships
                               Medals
                               03* Gold medals
                               02* Silver medals
                               Shortlisted twice for world mil
                               games (china & Qatar)

                               Table tennis
                               2017 College of military
                               engineering Pune
                               3* gold medal in singles, doubles
                               and mixed doubles category
                               2020-MCEME-1* Gold (single


                                           PART G

     category)

     Badminton
     2014- 36 Division Badminton
     Championship
     1*silver medal (singles)
     2* gold medal (mixed doubles and
     double category)
     2016- CME badminton
     tournament
     01*silver medal (mixed doubles
     category)

     4.Responsible for implementation
     of automation of the first
     Technical Store Section in EME.
     Did officiating OC in arty brigade
     workshop
     Citation from the unit initiated for
     refurbishing Karazes and making
     mobile ramp girders in just two
     months. And awarded
     outstanding Acr.
     4.Did OC LRW 114 AER, no
     breakdown in exercises.
     5.Doing mandatory EMEODE
     after YOs and Ops and logistics.
     Convocation of technical degree
     course on 10 Dec next month.
     6.Medically Shape One.

     503 x tenures in Field in North
     East and 02 x tenures in J& in
     criteria appt of Ord.

     6. Qualified in CI from CITS
     Balipara. 7 Received COAS CC in
     2020. Meghalaya Governor's
     Award for best NCC off[ice]r in
     NER.

     8.Project off[ice]r for
     implementing the Pilot Project of
     Automation of enrolment of
     cadets of NCC Dte in NER.

     9. Extension taken by the
     Commanding Officers in two
     different units in Organisational
     interest in field and peace.

104
                                                                      PART G


                               10. Mostly outstanding ACRs.
Remarks

Name Lt Col Mamta Gupta
Course WS 18
Arms EME
Achievements From First batch to do TO
                               (psychologist) course
                               First WO to be posted at selection
                               centre Bangalore, Kapurthala and
                               INI as psychologist
                               First WO to get gold medal and
                               DGEME all rounder officer trophy
                               in degree course
                               Twice got UN mission call
                               Sports person, won stn
                               competitions in many postings
                               Instructor grading
                               Did all arm QM course
                               Conducted PDP for service entry
                               at HRDC as assessor

Name Lt Col (Dr) Kamalpreet Saggi
Course WS 15
Arms EME
Achievements BE(mechanical)
                               MBA
                               PhD
                               TO(psychologist) course
                               posted at selection center Bhopal
                               as psychologist
                               First WO to get gold medal and
                               DGEME all rounder officer
                               trophy in degree course
                               Twice got UN mission call
                               Sports person, won stn
                               competitions in many postings
                               Instructor grading
                               Did all arm QM course
                               Conducted PDP for service entry
                               at HRDC as assessor

Name Lt Col Asha Kale
Course WS 04 (20 Aug 1994)
Arms AOC
Achievements 1.First WO to be posted to J & K

                          105
                                                                      PART G

                               in active Cl. Extn of tenure was
                               taken by unit in organisational
                               interest.

                               2.Deployed in forward area during
                               Op Vijay and Op Parakram.

                               3.Raised Technical Store Section
                               (TSS) in 14 Corps EME Bn during
                               its raising. Also carried out
                               automation of TSS for the first
                               time in 1999-2000. Was awarded
                               an outstanding ACR.

                               4. Successfully completed training
                               in CITS Balipara, Assam in 2005.

                               5. During tenure in NCC Dte NER
                               was Project officer to implement
                               Pilot Project for Automation of
                               cadets enrolment in complete
                               NCC. Extn for 6 months was
                               taken by Dte in organisational
                               interest.

                               6.Was awarded COAS CC in
                               2020 and also Meghalaya
                               Governors' Medal for best NCC
                               offr in NER.

                               7.All ACRs are outstanding after
                               reinstatement.
Remarks Three ERE tenures...02 with
                               EME and 01 with NCC
                               (Deputation)

Name Lt Col Ipsa Ratha
Course WS 15
Arms ASC
Achievements Qual
                               B Sc
                               MA in Personnel Management
                               and Industrial Relations

                               1.Total Regimental service of 10
                               years in second line and third line
                               Bns.
                               2.Served as a DAQMG in 25 Inf
                               Div.

                          106
                                                                      PART G

                               3.Served as GS01 SD in 16
                               Corps
                               4.Catering Off[ice]r in School of
                               Arty.
                               5.All outstanding ACR
                               6.Participated in Op Parakaram
                               7.Three tenures in CI(Ops) in
                               Northern Command and one
                               tenure in CI(ops) in North East
                               8.Awarded GOC in C
                               Commendation


Name Lt Col Inderjeet Kaur
Course WSES 20
Arms EME
Achievements Qual
                               B Tech (E&CE) with
                               DISTINCTION all 4 yrs
                               M Tech (Quality Mgt) from BITS
                               PILANI (CGPA 9.4)
                               YOs grading 'A'

                               1.18 yrs of physical service.
                               Served in Strike Corps, ArtyDiv,
                               2x Base Wksp tenure, Corps
                               Zonal Wksp, EME Bn and Armd
                               Div.
                               2.Tenented Appt of LPO
                               &MtrlControl offr in 509 Army
                               Base Wksp, OC LRW in 31 ADSR
                               an indep appt, Admoffr in 505
                               Army Base Wksp.
                               3.Participated in OP Parakaram.
                               4.Served in OP Rakshak.
                               5.Served in OP Rhino.
                               6.Overall Good/Outstanding
                               ACRs.
                               7.SHAPE I in Medical Category.


Name Lt Col Navneet Lobana
Course WS19
Arms Engineers
Achievements First women off[ice]r to do a
                               Garrison Engineer Appointment.
                               Got best GE Trophy in Central
                               Command

                          107
                                                                      PART G

                               during the tenure.

                               Done all mandatory courses incl
                               JC with good gradings.

                               Raised a new unit GE Command
                               Test Lab in Udhampur and got
                               outstanding report for the same.

                               Got UN call in 4th year of service
                               but could not proceed due to
                               personal issues.

                               Done instr CL A appt at MEG &
                               Centre, Bangalore.

                               Outstanding/very good ACRs
                               during entire service.

                               Presently doing MTech which is a
                               promotion course
                               After clearing interview and MS
                               criteria.
Remarks I am pursuing MTech since July
                               2020 for which MS Branch found
                               me fit & competent
                                    Post Feb judgement

Name Lt Col Anjali Bisht
Course Ws 09
Arms Signals
Achievements Participated in nationals while
                               representing army team in ski
                               Instr tenure in mctemhow
                               Army Commander Northern
                               Command, commendation card
                               Just been recommended for
                               COAS citation
                               3rd rank in Lucknow
                               Self volunteered for jc course at
                               20 years of service and apart
                               being nominated as course senior
                               got B grading
                               Specialised in procurement
                               procedures, endorsed in pen
                               picture.
Remarks 8 out of last ten Acr were graded
                               as outstanding


                          108
                                                                      PART G

Name Lt Col Amandeep Aulakh
Course WS 10
Arms Eng[inee]rs
Achievements Part of the first course to do
                               Combat Engr Yos

                               First lady off[ice]r to be posted in
                               Armd Engr Regt

                               First lady off[ice]r to be posted in
                               an Engr plant unit

                               Actively participated in Op
                               Prakaram being posted in aengr
                               plant unit. Was responsible for
                               detachment maintenance at LC in
                               15 XXX, carried out inspection on
                               ground of all the dets

                               Done three regti tenures out of
                               which two were in Cl/Fd

                               Commanded a unit in CI for
                               seven months.

                               Outstanding/Above avg ACRs
Remarks

Name Lt Col Ritu Srivastava
Course WS 12
Arms  AOC
Achievements 1.Goc in C Commendation card-
                               01
                               2.GSO 1 trg at AOC regiment
                               Centre
                               3.Did 5 important appointments.
                               (AE), All Outstanding AE reports
                               from IO
                               4.Awarded Van Prahari from
                               Rajasthan state Govt
                               5.Qualified in computer course
                               from CDAC, Disaster
                               management from NIDM, MBA in
                               supply chain management
                               6.Prov n proc off[ice]r of two
                               biggest tech COD.
                               7.Subject matter expert in civilian
                               persmgt
                               8.Participated in Op Parakaram

                          109
                                                                      PART G

                               and Op Rakshak.
Remarks

Name Lt Col Manreet
Course WSES 13 (March, 1999)
Arms AOC
Achievements 1 Outstanding ACRs in AE
                               appointments.
                               2 Tenanted appointment of Dy
                               Commandant of an Advanced
                               Base Ordnance Depot.
                               Outstanding ACR during the
                               tenure and
                               Name forward for outstanding
                               officer of the corps.
                               3 Tenanting appointment of
                               second in command in various
                               Units with outstanding and above
                               average ACRs.

                               4 Officiated as Commanding
                               Officer in Arunachal Pradesh
                               during Doklam dispute when
                               loads ammunition was required to
                               be pushed fwd to Op location.
                               5 Participated in Op Parakram,
                               Op Vijay and Op Zafran and
                               various Exercises With Troops
                               (EWT)
                               6 Tenures in Cl Ops and Field
                               7 SHAPE 1 medical category.

Name Lt Col Karuna Sood
Course WSES 15 (March, 2000)
Arms Sigs
Achievements Present Med Cat SHAPE 1
                               Civil Qualifications.
                               BSC (PCM)
                               MFC
                               Performance in Army
                               1.Initially commissioned in the
                               Strike Corps and participated in
                               OP Parakaram
                               2.Served in Command and Army
                               HQ Units.
                               3.Considered for UN MSN
                               interview however could not
                               appear due to maternity reasons.

                          110
                                                                      PART G

                               4. Served in CI (Ops) in Northern
                               Command as DAA&QMG.
                               5.Commanded NCC boys Bn for
                               one and half year in officiating
                               capacity.
                               6. Nominated for GTO and first
                               women officer GTO to be posted
                               in SSB (C ) Bhopal.
                               7. Handpicked for appointment of
                               2IC provost in an Div Provost Unit
                               as part of test bed for posting
                               women officers in CMP.
                               8. First women officer to be given
                               second tenure of CMP in a elite
                               unit of Delhi.
                               9.Participated in all ceremonial
                               events of National level for
                               consecutive two and a half years.
                               10.Presently posted in a Cat B
                               training establishment.
                               11.Have been rated as above
                               average to outstanding grading in
                               all the UACs/ACRs by IOs in few
                               cases by ROs as well where ever
                               IO was not present.

Name Lt Col Preetal Parkhi
course WS 17
Arm Corps of Sigs
Achievements Achievement

                               1.Volunteered for RR posting and
                               served in Force Sig Regt.

                               2. Served three field tenures in
                               J&K including one each of RR
                               and High altitude.

                               3. Carried out only AE appts
                               (Comn Coy Cdr of Comd, Corps
                               and Div Sig Regt) from 6th-13th
                               year of service in field and peace
                               and criteria ACR initiated for all
                               those appts.

                               4. Independently taken entire Unit
                               for EWT as OIC Ex.

                               5.Chosen for and represented

                          111
                                                                                                          PART G

                                                               Sigs for demonstrating e-learning
                                                               capabilities of Indian Army to US
                                                               delegation.

                                                               5. Presently, Single handedly
                                                               executing Landline Comn projects
                                                               of Airforce in SWAC
                           Remarks


(viii) Of the above officers, it is necessary to emphasize in particular Lt. Col.
         Navneet Lobana (serial No XIV above). Lt. Col. Lobana is presently
         pursuing an M.Tech degree course for which she has been deputed by the
         Army from 30 July 2020. Following the decision not to grant a PC to her,
         the officer has been asked to refund the cost of the course which is
         approximately between Rs. 8.5 to 10 lacs. Applications for selection of
         officers for a Master of Technology in Structures at the College of Military
         Engineering were invited by the Training Branch, E-i-C's Branch of
         Integrated Headquarters of MoD (Army), by a communication dated 28
         November 2019. Based on a qualitative requirement criterion, the
         applications were shortlisted and a list of officers eligible for the interview
         was published on 20 April 2020. Lt. Col. Lobana was interviewed by a
         panel of DRDO Scientists at the College of Military Engineering, a Board
         of Officers headed by Brigadier rank officers and member officers from MS
         Branch 12 (Military Secretary Branch of Corps of Engineers) and Training
         Branch from E-in-C's Branch. The officer was finally detailed on 10 July
         2020 and has given an undertaking to continue to serve the Army for a
         minimum period of five years. Following her selection for the course, Lt.
         Col. Lobana moved from her posting at Patiala and reported to the College

                                                         112
                                                                                               PART G

        of Military Engineering, Pune and the course commenced on 30 July 2020.
        She is the only woman officer who has qualified in 2020 for an M.Tech in
        the Indian Army. She has been denied PC and has been asked to refund
        the cost of the course. The issue of medical fitness is not being considered
        here since it will be dealt with later.


94 The above analysis leads to the conclusion that the process by which
WSSCOs, were evaluated for the grant of PC was by a belated application of a
general policy that did not redress the harms of gendered discrimination that
were identified by this Court in Babita Puniya (supra). Additionally, its belated
and formal application causes an effect of indirect discrimination. The petitioners
submitted that Special No. 5 Selection Board appears to have been more a
Board for rejection of candidates, than for selection. Some of the finest women
officers who have served the Indian Army and brought distinction by their
performance and achievements have been excluded by refusing to consider their
achievements on the specious ground that these were after the 5th/10th year of
service. They have been asked to benchmark with the last male counterparts
from the corresponding batches. The benchmarking criterion plainly ignores that
in terms of the MoD Policy Letter dated 15 January 1991 a cut-off of 60 per cent
was prescribed and a cap of 250 officers who would be granted PC annually was
laid down. Competitive merit was required to be assessed only where the number
of eligible officers exceeds the ceiling of 250. As the figures which have been
disclosed by the Union of India indicate, for the period from 1994-2010, there
were years when the ceiling of 250 officers had not been reached. Then there are

                                                   113
                                                                                               PART G

other years where the total number of male officers granted PC was well in
excess of 250. For years during which the ceiling of 250 had not been reached,
there is absolutely no justification to exclude the WSSCOs who had fulfilled the
cut-off grade on the basis of the benchmarking criteria. Moreover, it is evident
that the ceiling of 250 was not regarded as an absolute or rigid criterion as
already indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.

95 The evaluation process which has been followed in the case of the
WSSCOs has clearly ignored that the writing of their ACRs was fundamentally
influenced by the circumstance that at the relevant time an option of PC was not
available for women. Even as late as October 2020, the authorities have
emphasized the need to duly fill in a recommendation on whether or not
WSSCOs should be granted PC. The manner of allocating 20 marks or 5 marks
as the case may be, in the subjective assessment has been found to be flawed
since male counterparts of the WSSCOs were assessed by an entirely distinct
Special No. 5 Selection Board. To make a comparison in regard to the award of
subjective marks ranging between 5 and 20 by different sets of boards would be
completely unfair and arbitrary. It does not fulfill the avowed purpose of
benchmarking which was to compare like with like.

96 In addition to this, an argument on systemic flaws has been advanced by
the petitioners that they were not given career enhancement opportunities
available to their male counterparts, such as participating in performance
courses, and in cases where they did participate in such courses, it was not given
due reflection in their ACRs. The ASG in his written submissions has stated that

                                                   114
                                                                                               PART G

this argument is incorrect and that women officers have done mandatory courses.
The only difference, he states, lies in the fact that certain male officers had done
additional non-mandatory courses, which would not give any extra advantage as
the marks were given only on an average basis. We do not find merit in the
submissions of the ASG. While it may be the case that in some instances women
officers were given the opportunity to undertake additional courses to enhance
their performance, we must also be alive to the other end of the spectrum which
is that, at no point during their service were women officers incentivized to take
such performance enhancement courses as they were never eligible for grant of
PC then. It may have been the case that for extension of their service such
performance enhancing measures were not critical. Even if we take the argument
of the ASG at its highest and concede that these additional courses would not
make any difference since the marks were given on an average, it is still possible
that these courses could have impacted the value judgment or the subjective
criterion of 20 or 5 marks, as the case may be, in their ACRs. The impact caused
by the evaluation of ACRs, particularly on the marks for performance of courses
is a stark representation of the systemic discrimination that pervaded the
structures of the Army. A formalistic application of pre-existing policies while
granting PC is a continuation of these systemic discriminatory practices.
WSSCOs were continued in service with a clear message that their advancement
would never be equal to their male counterparts. Their ACR evaluations made no
difference to their careers, until PC was granted to them by a court mandate in
Babita Puniya (supra). Accordingly, some women's failure to opt for courses in
the past that would strengthen their chances and reflect positively on their ACRs

                                                   115
                                                                                               PART G

is not a vacuous "exercise of choice" but a consequence of a discriminatory
incentive structure.

97 Finally, the above analysis indicates that there has been a flawed attempt
to peg the achievements of the WSSCOs at the 5th/10th years of service thereby
ignoring the mandate that the last ACR ought to be considered and the
quantitative performance for the entire record of service must be assessed.
Considering the ACRs as on the 5th or 10th year of service for grant of PC would
have been appropriate, if the WSCCOs were being considered for PC at that
point of time. However, the delayed implementation of the grant of PC to
WSSCOs by the Army and considering of ACRs only till the 5th/10th year of
service has led to a situation where, in effect, the Army has obliviated the years
of service, hard work and honours received by WSSCOs beyond their 5th/10th
year of service and relegated them back to a position they held, in some cases,
more than 10 years ago. The lack of consideration given to the recent
performance of WSSCOs for grant of PC is a disservice not just to these officers
who have served the nation, but also to the Indian Army, which on one hand
salutes these officers by awarding them honours and decorations, and on the
other hand, fails to assess the true value of these honours when it matters the
most - at the time of standing for the cause of the WSSCOs to realise their rights
under the Constitution and be treated on an equal footing as male officers who
are granted PC.

98 On the basis of our analysis we have come to the conclusion that while
implementing the judgment of this Court in Babita Puniya (supra), the Army

                                                   116
                                                                                               PART G

authorities have attempted to demonstrate the application of a facially neutral
standard as between WSSCOs and their male counterparts. The entire approach
is indicated in the following averment in the counter affidavit filed by the Military
Secretary:

                "That the Petitioners herein on one hand seek to be treated at
                par with the male counterparts, however, on the other hand,
                seek special and unjustified treatment in the eligibility
                conditions."

Subsequently, in the course of the written submission, an apology has been
tendered in the following terms:

                "11. At this stage, an apology would be in order as regards
                the equivocality of the last sentence in para 14 of the C/A
                (pages 21 and 22), which though made in good faith to
                emphasize the point that the implementation is being done,
                treating women officers at par with the men officers, ended
                up, albeit inadvertently, carrying an impression as if the same
                is being done to complete the rituals. It is submitted that the
                UoI is immensely proud of the contribution of women officers
                to the cause of Indian Army. It is submitted that it is not by
                any pre-planning that a particular number of women SSC
                officers do not find themselves approved for PC."


99 The fact that there was no pre-planning to exclude women from the grant
of PC is irrelevant under an indirect discrimination analysis. As we have noted
previously, under this analysis, the Court has to look at the effect of the
concerned criteria, not at the intent underlying its adoption. In light of the fact that
the pattern of evaluation will in effect lead to women being excluded from the
grant of PC on grounds beyond their control, it is indirectly discriminatory against
WSSCOs.



                                                   117
                                                                                               PART G

100 We must recognize here that the structures of our society have been
created by males and for males. As a result, certain structures that may seem to
be the "norm" and may appear to be harmless, are a reflection of the insidious
patriarchal system. At the time of Independence, our Constitution sought to
achieve a transformation in our society by envisaging equal opportunity in public
employment and gender equality. Since then, we have continuously endeavored
to achieve the guarantee of equality enshrined in our Constitution. A facially
equal application of laws to unequal parties is a farce, when the law is structured
to cater to a male standpoint.85 Presently, adjustments, both in thought and letter,
are necessary to rebuild the structures of an equal society. These adjustments
and amendments however, are not concessions being granted to a set of
persons, but instead are the wrongs being remedied to obliterate years of
suppression of opportunities which should have been granted to women. It is not
enough to proudly state that women officers are allowed to serve the nation in the
Armed Forces, when the true picture of their service conditions tells a different
story. A superficial sense of equality is not in the true spirit of the Constitution and
attempts to make equality only symbolic.


101 Accordingly, the respondents must remove the requirement of
benchmarking the WSSCOs with the last male officer who had received PC in
their corresponding batches and all WSSCOs meeting the 60% cut-off must be
granted PC. Additionally, the calculation of the cut-off at 60%, which must by
army orders and instructions be reviewed every 2 years, must be re-assessed to


85 Catharine A. MacKinnon, TOWARDS A FEMINIST THEORY OF STATE (Harvard University Press 1989) at p.220.

                                                   118
                                                                                                                    PART G

determine if the casual completion of their ACRs is disproportionately impacting
the WSSCOs ability to qualify for PC even at that threshold. In light of the
systemic discrimination that women have faced in the Army over a period of time,
to call for the adoption of a pattern of evaluation that accounts and compensates
for this harsh reality is not to ask for 'special and unjustified treatment'. Rather, it
is the only pathway for the attainment of substantive equality. To adopt a
symmetrical concept of equality, is to empty the antidiscrimination guarantee
under Article 15, of all meaning.

G.4 Medical Criteria

102 The medical criteria for assessing officers for the grant of PC have been
specified in Army instructions and Army Orders to which a detailed reference has
been made in the earlier part of this judgment. While dealing with the application
of the criteria to the WSSCOs in pursuance of the judgment in Babita Puniya
(supra), it would be necessary to revisit some salient features:

(i) SAI/3/S/70 specifically provided that in order to be eligible to apply for PC,
          an SSC officer must be in medical category A-1. Those placed in medical
          categories A-2, B-1 and B-2 as a result of casualties suffered in action
          during operations could also be considered on the merits of each case by
          the government;
(ii) Subsequently, when the SHAPE criteria was introduced, para 2(b) was re-
          constructed in 1972 by AI 102/1972 to stipulate that the medical category
          should not be lower than grade-II under any of the SHAPE factors,
          excluding the 'S' factor in which the grade should not be lower than 1. In
                                                              119
                                                                                                                     PART G

          exceptional cases, it was stipulated that a grading of 2 in both H and E
          together may be acceptable. A low medical categorization could not be
          due to medical reasons, but only as a result of casualties suffered in action
          during operations or due to injury or other disability sustained during duty;
(iii) Subsequently, AO 110/1981 contained a stipulation for medical boards.
          Para 13 indicated that for officers who are placed in the TLMC, medical
          board proceedings recorded on form AFMSF-2 are not required until their
          medical category stabilizes. Upon the stabilization of the medical category,
          certain procedures had to be followed;
(iv) Army Instruction 75-81 dated 4 November 1978 provided for the terms and
          conditions of service for officers granted SSC in the Army Medical Corps.
          While laying down an upper age limit of 45 years, para 3(d) also stipulated
          that applicants must be in medical category SHAPE-1;
(v) AO 18/1988 stipulates in para 21, that the medical category of an officer
          seeking PC should not be lower than grade 2 under any of the SHAPE
          factors, excluding the 'S' factor in which the grade should not be lower than
          1. In exceptional cases, grading of 2 in both H and E together acceptable.
          Moreover low medical categorization should have been caused as a result
          of casualties suffered in action during operations or due to injuries or other
          disabilities sustain during duty;
(vi) Army Instruction 14/1999 dated 1 August 1999 amended SAI 3/S/70 by
          stipulating that

                    "Their medical category should not be lower than S1 or H2 or
                    A3 or P2 or E2 or H2E2 or H2A3 or H2P2 or E2A3 or E2P2.
                    However grant of Permanent Commission to low medical

                                                               120
                                                                                                     PART G

                  category Short Service Commissioned Officers will be subject
                  to rendition of the requisite certificate in terms of AO 20/75"

(vii) AO 9/2011 specifically defines the meaning of the SHAPE criteria and
         makes detailed provisions in regard to modalities for evaluation of medical
         fitness. We have already adverted to the meaning and content of the
         SHAPE criteria in the earlier part of this judgment.

103 The essence of the submission which has been urged on behalf of the
petitioners is that the General Instructions dated 1 August 2020 stipulated that
only those officers who are SHAPE 1 or in the PLMC will undergo a medical
board. Officers with TLMC were required to submit the proceedings of their
medical categorization or re-categorization, giving their present medical category.
Such TLMC officers who were otherwise found fit for PC by the Special No. 5
Selection Board were given a maximum period of one year of stabilization of their
medical category. As regards officers in the PLMC categorization, it was clarified
that this should not be due to medical reasons (whether attributable to military
service or not) but should have been a result of casualties suffered in action
during operations or due to disabilities by other injury sustained during duty such
as while traveling on duty, during training exercises or playing organized games
under regimental arrangements. In addition, certain specific medical categories
were made ineligible for the grant of PC.

104 Now the singular aspect of the medical requirements that must be noticed
at the outset is that there is a broad consistency of policy on the norms, which
have to be fulfilled in order for an officer to qualify for the grant of PC. Another

                                                      121
                                                                                               PART G

important facet which needs to be emphasized is that SHAPE-1 has a specific
meaning which is assigned to it under AO 9/2011. 'S' donates the physiological
features including cognitive function abnormalities, 'H' stands for hearing, 'A' for
appendages, 'P' for physical capacity and 'E' for eye-sight. The requirement of
being in grade-1 in each of the five factors of SHAPE is subject to relaxation in
terms of exceptions which are clearly spelt out. The policy provides a concession
to such candidates who may not have suffered injury on the line of duty as a
result of which their medical categorization has been lowered. But this should not
be lower than S1 or H2 or A3 or P2 or E2 or A2E2 or H2A3 or H2P2 or E2A3 or
E2P2. The exception which has been provided is available if an injury (as distinct
from a disease) has been suffered while on the line of duty, irrespective of
whether it has been incurred during peace time or in field operations. Officers in
the PLMC who fulfill the terms of the exception are granted PC, if they are
otherwise found fit on merits. The requirement of fulfilling the SHAPE criteria as
explained earlier is a pre-requisite even in such arms or services where both
men and women join up to the age of 45 years, as in the case of the Army
Medical Corps. The Army follows and adopts the TLMC norm which allows an
officer placed in that category to return to SHAPE 1 within the stabilization period
of one year. By this, an opportunity is granted to the officer to return to the
SHAPE-1 category within one year.

105 Physical fitness is crucial for securing a place in the Army. While
exercising judicial review, the Court must be circumspect on dealing with policies
prescribed for the Armed Forces personnel in attaining norms associated with
physical and mental fitness. In the present case, as disclosed before this Court,

                                                   122
                                                                                               PART G

out of the initial 87 petitioners contesting the proceedings in 7 writ petitions, 55
are SHAPE 1 going up to the age of 52 years, 23 have been assigned to PMLC,
while 9 are placed in TLMC. The material which has been placed on record in the
form of AO 9/2011 indicates a classification range of minimum and maximum
permissible parameters for each of the five factors comprised within the SHAPE
norm. The submission of the respondents is that these parameters have been
fixed, keeping in mind the inevitable advancement of age of both men and
women officers. Moreover, in refusing to consider the SSC extensions as
sufficient evidence of fitness, it has been submitted by the respondents that an
unsaid concession is made in terms of medical requirements where an officer has
been considered for extension as opposed to when they are considered for grant
of PC. Another important aspect which has been emphasized is that out of 615
WSSCOs officers, 422 were found fit on merits for PC subject to fulfillment of
medical and discipline parameters. Out of these 422, 57 were non-optees. From
the remaining 365, 277 women officers were found fit on merits as well on
medical parameters and have been granted PCs. Of the remaining 88, 42 are
TLMC and have the opportunity to upgrade this to the required medical
parameters within one year. Out of the remaining 46, only 35 were found not to
meet the medical criteria. These 35 officers constitute less than ten per cent of
the 365 who had opted for the grant of PC and were found fit on merits. Even in
the remaining 193 officers (615 minus 422 found fit) that were not considered fit
for PC, it was submitted that 164 of these officers fulfilled the SHAPE-1
criterion. This tabulation indicates a significant proportion of WSSCOs,
irrespective of their belated consideration, are able to presently meet the

                                                   123
                                                                                               PART G

prescribed criteria. With respect to the medical criteria prescribed by the Army,
we are cognizant that there can be no judicial review of the standards adopted by
the Army, unless they are manifestly arbitrary and bear no rational nexus to the
objects of the organization. The SHAPE criterion is per se not arbitrary.

106 Having come to the conclusion that the medical criterion is per se not
arbitrary, it is the Court's responsibility to examine whether it has been equally
applied. We cannot shy away from the fact, that these 615 WSSCOs are being
subjected to a rigorous medical standard at an advanced stage of their careers,
merely on account of the fact that the Army did not consider them for granting
them PC, unlike their male counterparts. By the judgment of the Delhi High Court
dated 12 March 2010, specific directions were issued for considering the women
SSC officers for the grant of PC. This was a decade ago. During the pendency of
the appeal from the judgment of the Delhi High Court before this Court, there was
no stay on the application of the judgment of the High Court. This was specifically
clarified by the order of this Court on 2 September 2011. The intent of the
clarification was that implementation of the directions of the High court must
proceed. The WSSCOs have submitted with justification that had they been
considered for the grant of PC then, as the respondents were directed to do by
the decision of the Delhi High Court, they would have met the norms of eligibility
in terms of medical parameters. Their male counterparts who were considered for
and granted PC at that time are not required to maintain SHAPE 1 fitness to be
continued in service. Serious hardship has been caused by the Army not
considering the cases of these WSSCOs for the grant of PC at the relevant time,
despite the express clarification by this Court. Though the contempt proceedings

                                                   124
                                                                                               PART G

against the respondents were stayed, this did not obviate the obligation to comply
with the mandate of the judgment of the Delhi High Court especially after a
specific clarification that no stay had been granted. Consideration for PC was not
just a legitimate expectation on the part of the WSSCOs but a right which had
accrued in their favour after the directions of the High Court, which were issued
about a decade ago. The WSSCOs who have been excluded on medical grounds
in November 2020 have a legitimate grievance that whether they fulfilled the
SHAPE 1 criterion has to be determined from their medical status on the date
when they were entitled to be considered, following the decision of the Delhi High
Court. Such of them who fulfilled the criterion at the material time are entitled to
PC and can continue in service so long as they continue to meet the medical
standards prescribed for continuance in the Army. In other words, there is no
challenge to the criteria for medical fitness prescribed. These WSSCOs do not
seek a special dispensation or exemption for themselves, as women. The
essence of the dispute is when the SHAPE 1 criterion has to be applied in the
peculiar circumstances which have been noted above.

107 Within the SHAPE criterion, para 31 of AO 9/2011 provides for functional
capacities. This ranges from category 1A (fit for all duties anywhere) and
category 1B (fit for all duties anywhere under medical observation without
employability restrictions); category 2 (fit for all duties but with limitations
involving severe physical and mental stress); category 3 (except 'S' factor fit for
routine or sedentary duties but limitations of employment duties both job wise and
terrain wise); category 4 (temporarily unfit for duties on account of hospitality/sick
leave); and category 5 (permanently unfit for military duties).

                                                   125
                                                                                               PART G

108 It has been submitted by the petitioners that while being in SHAPE 1 is the
requirement at the induction or entry level, it is not the requirement for continued
service in the Army. Many of their male counterparts who are granted PC in their
5th or 10th year of service are entitled to continue in service, irrespective of
whether they continue to be compliant with SHAPE 1 criteria. In fact, the ASG
and Mr Balasubramaniam, learned Senior Counsel, submitted that even for the
time scale promotions to the rank of Colonel and Brigadier, there may be no
SHAPE-1 requirement. We need not dwell on that aspect since it is an admitted
position that SHAPE-1 is not a requirement for continuation in service. The ASG
had sought to bolster his submission of SHAPE-1 as a threshold requirement for
PC, by relying on the recruitment process for the Army Medical Corps, where
even a 45 year old person seeking recruitment, must comply with SHAPE-1
medical criteria. However, a critical assumption that undergirds the grant of PC is
the approximate age of persons who would be under consideration. The
WSSCOs in this case are not fresh recruits who are due to be considered in their
5th or 10th year of service, nor are they seeking exceptional favors on account of
their sex.

109 On one hand, the Army authorities are insistent on relying on the medical
criteria as a filtering mechanism for grant of PC to WSSCOs. On the other hand,
we have WSSCOs who have legally fought for their rights and are additionally
suffering due to the untimely implementation of their hard-won rights. The Army
authorities have stated that the medical criterion has been sufficiently adjusted to
take into account age related factors. However, the Army authorities are insistent
to apply the medical criteria as of today, while simultaneously attempting to

                                                   126
                                                                                               PART G

freeze the ACRs of the WSSCOs at the 5th or 10th year of service. Indirect
discrimination coupled with an exclusionary approach inheres in this application.
An enhancement in the qualifications of WSSCOs from their 5th/10th year of
service till today, as would be reflected in their recent ACRs, would demonstrate
them as an experienced pool of human resource for the Indian Army. However, a
reduction of medical fitness below the SHAPE 1 norm at present as a
consequence of age or the tribulations of service is not a necessary detriment to
the Army when similarly aged male officers with PC (invariably granted in the 5th
or 10th year of their service) no longer have to meet these rigorous medical
standards for continuing in service. This is further bolstered by the fact that the
WSSCOs who are no longer in SHAPE-1, have been meaningfully continuing in
service, even after 14 years of service, till the declaration of results of the PC in
November 2020.

110 We also must express our anguish at the respondents' failure to implement
the judgment rendered by the Delhi High Court in 2010, whose operation was
specifically not stayed by this Court in 2011. The conundrum on the applicability
of the medical criterion to WSSCOs who are 40-50 years old, has arisen only
because of the Army not having implemented its decision in time, despite the
course correction prescribed by the Delhi High Court in 2010. The WSSCOs, a
few of whom are petitioners before us today, have persevered for over a decade
to gain the same dignity of an equal opportunity at PC. The fact that only around
35 women who are otherwise fit for PC, and 31 women who do not qualify in
addition to not meeting the medical criteria, is irrelevant in determining whether
each of these women is entitled to equality of opportunity in matters of public

                                                   127
                                                                                               PART G

employment under Article 16(1) and (2). As observed by a 9 judge bench of this
Court in Justice KS Puttaswamy v. Union of India,86 a de minimis rationale is
not a permissible exception to invasion of fundamental rights. The Court,
speaking through one of us (Chandrachud, J.) had held that "the de minimis
hypothesis is misplaced because the invasion of a fundamental right is not
rendered tolerable when a few, as opposed to a large number of persons, are
subjected to hostile treatment."87 Similarly, the percentage of women who have
suffered as a consequence of the belated application of rigorous medical criteria
is irrelevant to the determination of whether it is a violation of Articles 14, 15 and
16 of the Constitution.

111 In rendering the decision in Babita Puniya (supra), this Court was mindful
of the insidious impact on the generations of women who must have given up on
their dreams to serve in the Armed Forces owing to the gendered roadblock on
their aspirations, and of the women who must have chosen to opt out of availing
an extension to their SSC terms on similar grounds. We must not forget that
those women officers who have remained in service are those with the tenacity to
hold on and to meet the exacting standards of performance of which the Indian
Army has made her citizens proud. It is also important for us to bear in mind that
a career in the Army comes with a serious set of trials and tribulations of a
transferable service with postings in difficult terrains, even in times of peace. This
is rendered infinitely more difficult when society relegates functions of domestic
labour, care-giving and childcare exclusively on the shoulders of women. The
WSSCOs before us are not just women who have dedicated their lives to the

86 (2017) 10 SCC 1
87 Id. at para 128
                                                   128
                                                                                               PART G

service of the Army, but are women who have persevered through difficult
conditions as they trudged along a lengthy litigation to avail the simplest of
equality with their male counterparts. They do not come to the Court seeking
charity or favour. They implore us for a restoration of their dignity, when even
strongly worded directions by the Court in Babita Puniya (supra) have not
trickled down into a basic assessment of not subjecting unequals to supposedly
"neutral parameters".

112 We are unable to accept the ASG's submission on the medical criteria
being modulated to account for advancement of age. The timing of the
administration of rigorous standards is a relevant consideration for determining
their discriminatory impact, and not just an isolated reading of the standards
which account for differences arising out of gender. The WSSCOs have been
subject to indirect discrimination when some are being considered for PC, in their
20th year of service. A retrospective application of the supposedly uniform
standards for grant of PC must be modulated to compensate for the harm that
has arisen over their belated application. In the spirit of true equality with their
male counterparts in the corresponding batches, the WSSCOs must be
considered medically fit for grant of PC by reliance on their medical fitness, as
recorded in the 5th or 10th year of their service.

G.5 WSSCOs belonging to WSES(O) 27-31 and SSC(T&NT) 1-3 who had
        not completed 14 years of service as on the date of Babita Puniya

113 Another aspect of the case relates to the interpretation of the direction in
Babita Puniya (supra) mandating WSSCOs who have completed 14 years of

                                                   129
                                                                                               PART G

service as on the date of the judgment to be considered for PC. In the event of
their non-approval or non-option, these officers are to be continued in service for
20 years, with benefits of pension. In Babita Puniya (supra), the directions
issued by this Court, were while accepting the policy decision of the Union
Government. The policy decision of the Union Government for the grant of PCs to
WSSCOs in all the ten streams where women were granted SSC in the Indian
Army was accepted, subject to several conditions which were spelt out in clauses
(a) to (g) of direction (1) in paragraph 69 of the judgment. The directions (a) to (c)
are again reproduced below as a convenient point of reference:

                "69. [...]
                (i) [...]

                     (a) All serving women officers on SSC shall be
                         considered for the grant of PCs irrespective of any of
                         them having crossed fourteen years or, as the case
                         may be, twenty years of service.
                     (b) The option shall be granted to all women presently in
                         service as SSC officers.
                     (c) Women officers on SSC with more than fourteen
                         years of service who do not opt for being considered
                         for the grant of the PCs will be entitled to continue in
                         service until they attain twenty years of pensionable
                         service.
                     (d) As a one-time measure, the benefit of continuing in
                         service until the attainment of pensionable service
                         shall also apply to all the existing SSC officers with
                         more than fourteen years of service who are not
                         appointed on PC."
                                                           (emphasis supplied)

Directions (e), (f) and (g) are not material at this stage. Direction (d) refers to
"existing SSC officers with more than 14 years of service". This expression is
clearly intended to encompass those WSSCOs who had completed 14 years of

                                                   130
                                                                                               PART G

service on the date of the judgment. It is important to note that these officers
were also granted the benefit of continuing in service until the attainment of
pensionable service.

114 The petitioners in Lt. Col. Reena Gairola v. Union of India88 and in Major
Nilam Gorwade v. Union of India89 belong to the group of women officers
recruited under the WSES(O)- 27 to 31 and SSCW(T&NT) 1 to 3. These
petitioners were commissioned on or after March 2006 and had not completed 14
years of service as on the date of the judgment in Babita Puniya (supra). Under
the directions in Babita Puniya (supra), in case they do not opt for PC or opt for
PC and are not granted PC, they will be released at the end of their 14 years of
contractual service. The petitioners in these batches would neither be entitled to
pension as they would have only completed 14 years of service at the end of their
contract, nor would they be given the one time relief granted in Babita Puniya
(supra) of entitlement to continue in service for 20 years.

115 The petitioners in the abovementioned writ petitions have argued that
within their batches (WSES(O) - 27 to 31 and SSCW(T&NT) 1 to 3), 161 women
have been granted PC, out of the 284 serving officers. 66 officers who were not
approved for PC (allegedly, inter alia, as a consequence of the medical criteria
and ACR assessment) and 9 officers who did not opt for PC, have to retire at the
end of their contractual term of 14 years, with no pension or benefits. It is
pertinent to mention that these petitioners were not a party before this Court in
Babita Puniya (supra) and consequently could not make out a case for their


88 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 34 of 2021
89 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1223 of 2020
                                                   131
                                                                                               PART G

entitlement to a similar relief for extension till they attain pensionable service, in
light of the respondents failing to consider them in time, despite the petitioners
being beneficiaries of the judgment of the Delhi High Court.

116 The case of the petitioners is also that at the time of rendering of the
judgment of the Delhi High Court in 2010, these WSSCOs had completed a
maximum of 4 years in service (or less). Once relief was granted to them by the
Delhi High Court and the interim order of the Supreme Court, these WSSCOs
took a conscious decision based on these reliefs to continue in service, in
anticipation that sooner or later, they would be granted PC. Had they been
rejected for PC upon the judgment of the Delhi High Court in 2010, that is over a
decade ago, it would have been easier for them to make a career shift and seek
employment elsewhere.

117 This Court, as a consequence of the constraint of information being
provided to it by the parties arraigned before it in Babita Puniya (supra), was not
alive to the full extent of the cadres who were denied a timely opportunity for PC
in their 5th or 10th year of service. Direction (c) and (d), as a one-time measure,
attempted to correct the gross injustice that was meted out to women officers
who had completed over 14 years in service, and were being considered for PC
at a belated stage. The one-time benefit of continuation in service until their 20th
year was provided as a corrective exercise for women who have devoted their
careers to the Army, in spite of the dignity of PC being elusive to them, merely as
a consequence of their gender. The Court's objective in providing for such a cut-
off was to compensate for the impact of the discrimination which had denied them

                                                   132
                                                                                               PART G

timely opportunities and to account for the significant risk and commitment they
demonstrated by their continuation in service.

118 It has been brought to our attention that the women officers in the batches
of WSES(O) - 27 to 31 and SSCW(T&NT) 1 to 3 face a similar predicament as
they are being considered for PC beyond their 10th year in service (in the best
case). Similar to the women in the older cadres who were denied opportunities,
career progressions and assurances owing to the respondents' failure at the
relevant time to ensure gender equality in the forces; the women in the batches
who were between 10-14 years of their service were meted the same insecurity.
The WSES scheme has been discontinued and the WSES(O) 31, commissioned
in 2008, is the last batch to have gained entry in the scheme, rendering it a 'dying
cadre'. We have deployed the expression 'dying cadre' not in a pejorative sense.
The expression has a specific meaning in service jurisprudence to denote a
dwindling class of officers in service. The officers in the consequent batches of
SSCW (T&NT) 1 to 3, although part of the new scheme that replaced WSES, will
be the only batches who will face an adverse impact of the respondents' failure to
implement the Delhi High Court judgement before the 10th year of their service. In
exercise of the constitutional power entrusted to this court under Article 142 to
bring about substantial justice, we are compelled to extend the benefit of
directions (c) and (d) in Babita Puniya (supra) to the officers of the
abovementioned batches, as a one-time benefit. This one-time extension, would
bring parity inter se between officers who were discriminated by their non-timely
consideration by the respondents.


                                                   133
                                                                                              PART H

H Conclusion and directions

119 Based on the above analysis, we are of the view that the evaluation criteria
set by the Army constituted systemic discrimination against the petitioners. The
pattern of evaluation deployed by the Army, to implement the decision in Babita
Puniya (supra) disproportionately affects women. This disproportionate impact is
attributable to the structural discrimination against women, by dint of which the
facially neutral criteria of selective ACR evaluation and fulfilling the medical
criteria to be in SHAPE-1 at a belated stage, to secure PC disproportionately
impacts them vis--vis their male counterparts. The pattern of evaluation, by
excluding subsequent achievements of the petitioners and failing to account for
the inherent patterns of discrimination that were produced as a consequence of
casual grading and skewed incentive structures, has resulted in indirect and
systemic discrimination. This discrimination has caused an economic and
psychological harm and an affront to their dignity.

120 For the above reasons, we allow the petitions in terms of the following
directions:
(i) The administrative requirement imposed by the Army authorities while
        considering the case of the women SSCOs for the grant of PC, of
        benchmarking these officers with the officers lowest in merit in the
        corresponding male batch is held to be arbitrary and irrational and shall not
        be enforced while implementing the decision of this Court in Babita
        Puniya (supra);
(ii) All women officers who have fulfilled the cut-off grade of 60 per cent in the
        Special No 5 Selection Board held in September 2020 shall be entitled to
                                                   134
                                                                                                                        PART H

          the grant of PC, subject to their meeting the medical criteria prescribed by
          the General Instructions dated 1 August 2020 (as explained in (iii) below)
          and receiving disciplinary and vigilance clearance;
(iii) For the purpose of determining the fulfillment of direction (ii), the medical
          criteria stipulated in the General Instructions dated 1 August 2020 shall be
          applied at the following points of time:
          (a) At the time of the 5th year of service; or
          (b) At the time of the 10th year of service, as the case maybe.

          In case the officer has failed to meet the medical criterion for the grant of
          PC at any of these points in time, the WSSCO will not be entitled to the
          grant of PC. We clarify that a WSSCO who was in the TLMC in the 5th/10th
          year of service and subsequently met the SHAPE-1 criterion after the one
          year period of stabilization, would also be eligible for grant of PC. Other
          than officers who are "non-optees", the cases of all WSSCOs, including the
          petitioners who have been rejected on medical grounds, shall be
          reconsidered within a period of one month and orders for the grant of PC
          shall in terms of the above directions be issued within a period of two
          months;

(iv) The grant of PC to the WSSCOs who have already been granted PC shall
          not be disturbed;
(v) The WSSCOs belonging to WSES(O) - 27 to 31 and SSCW(T&NT) 1 to 3
          who are not considered to be eligible for grant of PC after the above
          exercise, will be extended the one-time benefit of direction (c) and (d) in
          Babita Puniya (supra);
                                                                 135
                                                                                                          PART H

(vi) All consequential benefits including the grant of time scale promotions
         shall necessarily follow as a result of the directions contained in the
         judgment in Babita Puniya (supra) and the present judgment and steps to
         do so shall be completed within a period of three months from the date of
         the judgment;
(vii) The candidature of Lt. Col. Navneet Lobana, Petitioner No. 3 in Writ
         Petition (C) 1109 of 2020, will be reconsidered for grant of PC in terms of
         the above directions. In case the officer is not granted PC, she will be
         allowed to complete her M.Tech degree course for which she has been
         enrolled at the College of Military Engineering, Pune and shall not be
         required to pay or reimburse any amount towards the course;
(viii) In accordance with pre-existing policies of the respondents, the method of
         evaluation of ACRs and the cut-off must be reviewed for future batches, in
         order to examine for a disproportionate impact on WSSCOs who became
         eligible for the grant of PC in the subsequent years of their service; and
(ix) During the pendency of the proceedings, the ASG had assured the Court
         that all the serving WSSCOs would be continued in service, since the
         Court was in seisin of the proceedings. There shall be a direction that this
         position shall continue until the above directions of the Court are
         implemented and hence the serving WSSCOs shall be entitled to the
         payment of their salaries and to all other service benefits.





                                                         136
                                                                                              PART H

121 The writ petitions are accordingly disposed of in the above terms.
122 Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.


                                               ..................................................................J.
                                                      [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                              ....................................................................J.
                                                [M R Shah]

New Delhi;
March 25, 2021

                                                   137
