

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 25047 OF 2018

       ASSOCIATION FOR PROTECTION OF DEMOCRATIC
       RIGHTS & ANR. ...PETITIONER(S)
                                       VERSUS

       THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS. ...RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                O R D E R

                    The issue before us in SLP (C) 25047/2018 is whether we

       should allow the Government of West Bengal to fell the trees,

       in order to construct Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and widen the

       Roads. We are told that ROBs are necessitated to prevent

       accidents, which are several, over the past few years. This is

       the human/development concern that has been expressed by the

       State of West Bengal.

                    It is, however, undisputed that the ROBs can only be

       constructed after felling of several trees, ages of which are

       said to be up to 150 years. As per the Report of the Expert

       Committee submitted before us, primarily, about 50 trees have

       already been felled and potentially another 306 trees are to be

       felled. As per the Report, many of the trees can be called

       'historical trees', which have 'irreplaceable value' and

       compensatory afforestation cannot replace trees of this value.

       It is common ground that the trees cannot be transplanted at
Signature Not Verified

Madhu Balasome other location.
Digitally signed by
Date: 2021.03.25
16:42:06 IST
Reason:
                    The right to clean and healthy environment has been

       recognized as the fundamental right under Article 21 of the 2

Constitution of India. Article 48-A imposes duty upon the State

to endeavour to protect and improve the environment and

safeguard the forests and wildlife of the Country. In addition

to this, India is also a party to international treaties,

agreements and conferences and has committed itself to

sustainable development and growth. This legal framework

indicates that sustainable development must remain at the heart

of any development policy implemented by the state. It is

essential to strike the right balance between environmental

conservation and protection on one hand, and the right to

development on the other, while articulating the doctrine of

sustainable development. We may add that in our opinion

conservation and development need not be viewed as binaries,

but as complementary strategies that weave into one another. In

other words, conservation of nature must be viewed as part of

development and not as a factor stultifying development.

             One of the moot questions often involved wherever there

is need to fell trees to develop a project is how just and fair

compensation can be calculated for felling of trees by any

authority or organisation which proposes such felling. We have

no doubt that such compensation should be calculated and paid

as a part of the project cost of the project which necessitates

the felling of trees and such compensation must be utilized in

an expert manner to create a better environment and, most

importantly, increase afforestation. It is, therefore,

imperative to make a realistic assessment of the economic value

of a tree, which may be permitted to fell, with reference to 3

its value to environment and its longevity, with regard to

factors such as production of oxygen and carbon sequestration,

soil conservation, protection of flora/fauna, its role in

habitat and ecosystem integrity and any other ecologically

relevant factor, distinct from timber/wood.

             We note that the issue assumes significance from the

perspective of climate change as a growing national and

international concern. The pivotal policy document in India on

climate change is the National Action Plan on Climate Change

(NAPCC) formulated by Union Government in 2008, which

recognizes that the country is committed to increasing tree

cover from 23% to 33%. Under the Paris Agreement, India has

committed itself to Nationally Determined Contributions in

2015, wherein one of the stated objectives is to create an

additional carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of CO2

equivalent through additional forest and tree cover by 2030.

             In view of the aforesaid concept, based upon the

suggestions of the parties before us, we constitute an expert

committee of the following:

             (a) Dr. MK Ranjitsinh Jhala, wildlife expert and

             former Chairman of the Wildlife Trust of India - Chairman

             of the Committee;

            (b) Sri. Jigmet Takpa, Joint Secretary, Ministry of

             Environment, Forests and Climate Change- Member Secretary

             of the Committee; 4
            (c) Sri. Arun Singh Rawat, DG, Indian Council for

             Forestry Research-Member;

            (d) Prof. Sandeep Tambe, (Indian Forest Service),

             currently working as Professor of Forestry at the Indian

             Institute of Forest Management, Bhopal- Member;

            (e) Sri. Gopal Singh Rawat, former Dean and Director,

             Wildlife Institute of India- Member;

            (f) Dr. Nilanjan Ghosh, Director, Observer Research

             Foundation, Kolkata, an expert in ecological

             economics- Member and

            (g) Sri. Pradeep Krishen, Environmentalist- Member.

             The Committee shall discuss and recommend on the

following mandate:

             (a) Develop a set of scientific and policy guidelines

             that shall govern decision making with respect to cutting

             of trees for developmental projects.

             (b) These guidelines may specify the species of trees

             in categories based upon their environmental values

             considering the age and girth of the trees etc.

             (c) The guidelines may provide special treatment for

             geographical area or eco-sensitive area, they may

             identify areas which need to be regulated and even

             identify a minimum threshold beyond which the guidelines

             will apply.

             (d) The guidelines shall prescribe a mechanism for

             assessment of both intrinsic and instrumental value of 5

             the trees, based not only on the value of timber, but

             also the ecosystem services rendered by the trees and its

             special relevance, if any, to the habitat of other living

             organisms, soil, flowing and underground water.

             (e) The guidelines shall also mandate rules regarding

             alternate routes/sites for roads/projects, and

             possibilities for using alternate modes of transport like

             railways or water-ways.

             (f) The guidelines shall also prescribe the mode of

             compensation financial and otherwise, the stage of

             depositing such compensation and the process that governs

             the computation and recovery. In this regard, the

             committee may consider the existing regulatory framework

             regarding calculation of Net Present Value (NPV) and may

             suggest necessary modification.

             (g) In addition, the guidelines shall also specify the

             manner and mechanism of compensatory afforestation to be

             carried out using the deposited compensation, consistent

             with the native ecosystem, habitat and species.

             (h) The Committee may consider the need for any

             permanent expert body and its proposed structural form.

             (i) Any other issue incidental to the aforesaid

             objectives.

             We direct the Committee to file its recommendations

within four weeks from the date of its first meeting. 6

             The Union of India, through the Member Secretary of the

Committee, is directed to ensure that all administrative

facilities are provided to the Committee including functioning

office space, appropriate secretarial assistance and other

infrastructure. He shall also ensure that all

information/statistics necessary for the deliberations of the

Committee are made available. Further, he shall ensure that the

necessary arrangements are made for the travel and

boarding/lodging of the Committee members.

             We appoint Sri. K Parameshwar, Advocate as amicus curiae

to assist the Court on all the issues raised in the present

batch of petitions. The Registry is directed to send a copy of

the paperbooks and records to Sri. K Parameshwar. The amicus

shall also assist the committee constituted above, on the legal

aspects involved in framing and institutionalising the

guidelines it proposes.

             List the matter after four weeks.

                                                                                       ...................CJI
                                    [S.A. BOBDE]

                                                                           ....................J.
                                       [ A.S. BOPANNA]

NEW DELHI ....................J.
25TH MARCH, 2021 [V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN]
