Id : 4203
PRE_RELIED : 
 7.      In above view of the matter, the exercise of certification of the correctness of the inventory or taking of photographs of the seized goods or drawing representative samples can be nothing but an exercise which is administrative or executive in nature within the meaning of clause (b) of sub-Section (4) of Section 3 Cr.P.C.
Therefore, the word “Magistrate” appearing in Section 110 (IB) and (1C) of the Customs Act, 1962 must be interpreted so as to be read as a reference to an Executive Magistrate and not to a Judicial Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate.
 8.      A view to above effect taken by Gujarat High Court in Assistant Collector of Customs vs. Surender Praggar Gosain & Anr., (1988) 1 GLR 421 was adopted by a learned Single Judge of this court in Crl.M.C. No.526/2013, titled Directorate of Revenue Intelligence vs.
State, decided on 21.02.2013.

PRE_RELIED :       A contrary view taken by another learned Single Judge of this court in Crl. Misc. (Main) No.2484/1998, titled Department of Customs vs. Parvinder Kaur, decided on 24.08.2000 was apparently per incuriam and does not commend to be the correct approach for the reason the matter was not examined there in light of provision contained in Section 3(4) Cr.P.C.


Id : 4173
PRE_RELIED : 
 A Constitution Bench of this Court examined in the case of R. Abdul Quader & Co. v. Sales Tax officer, Hyderabad(1) the validity of section l l (2) of the Hyderabad Sales Tax Act, 1950 which reads as under: "(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any order of an officer or tribunal or judgment, decree or order of a Court, every person who has collected or collects on or before 1st May, 1950, any amount by way of tax otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall pay over to the Government within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed the amount so collected lay him, and in default of such payment the said amount shall be recovered from him as if it were arrears of land revenue."

PRE_RELIED : 
The appellant in that case collected sales tax from the purchasers of betel leaves in connection with the sales made by it.

PRE_RELIED : The appellant however, did not pay the amount collected to the government.

PRE_RELIED : The Government directed the appellant to pay the amount to the Government.

PRE_RELIED : The appellant thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court questioning the validity of section 11(2).

PRE_RELIED : The main contention of the appellant before the High Court was that section 11(2) which authorised the Government to recover a tax collected without the authority of law was beyond the competence of the State Legislature because a tax collected without the authority of law would not be a tax levied under the law and it would therefore not be open to the State to collect (1) [1964] 6 S.C.R. 867.under the authority of a law enacted under entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution any such amount.

PRE_RELIED : The High Court upheld the validity of section 11(2).

PRE_RELIED : 
On appeal to this Court it was observed by the Constitution Bench as under: "The first question therefore that falls for consideration is whether it was open to the State legislature under its powers under entry 54 of List II to make a provision to the effect that money collected by way of tax, even though it is not due as a tax under the Act, shall be made over to Government.

PRE_RELIED : Now it is clear that the sums so collected by way of tax arc not in fact tax exigible under the Act.

PRE_RELIED : So it cannot be said that the State legislature was directly legislating for the imposition of sales or purchase tax under entry 54 of List II when it made such a provision, for on the face of the provision.

PRE_RELIED : the amount, though collected by way of tax, was not exigible as tax under the law."


Id : 4147
PRE_RELIED : In Ramji Keshavji v.
Commissioner of ,Income tax 'Bombay(1), the Bombay High Court considered the scheme of s. 16(1)(c).

PRE_RELIED : According to that decision the first stage is that when there is a revocable transfer of assets.

PRE_RELIED : The income derived from such assets is still to be considered the income of the settlor.

PRE_RELIED : In his opinion the only way to reconcile the substantive provision of sub-cl. (c), Provisos (1) and (3) was to hold that proviso (3) contained a limitation which applied as much to the substantive provisions of sub-clause (c) as to proviso (1) 13 I.T.R. 105.The view expressed in the Ramji Keshavji case(1)

PRE_RELIED : was approved by this court in C.I.T. Patna v. Rani Bhuvaneshwari Kuer(2).

PRE_RELIED : In that case the assessee, who owned an estate known as 'Tekari Raj', created a trust with a view to liquidate the debts of Tekari Raj.

PRE_RELIED : The beneficiaries under the deed were the settlor, her husband and her sons.


Id : 4204

Id : 4142
PRE_RELIED : 11] In case of Jintudas ..vs.. State of Asam reported in 2003 Cri.L.J. 1411 the Learned Single Judge of the Gauhati High Court while dealing with the case involving similar facts and after considering evidence relating to the conduct of the victim observed that: "If a full grown woman consents to act of sexual intercourse on a promise of marriage and continues to indulge in such activity until she becomes pregnant, it is an act of promiscuity on her part and not an act induced by misconception of fact.

PRE_RELIED : In such facts and circumstances, the irresistible conclusion is that the accused had sexual intercourse with her consent.

PRE_RELIED : More so, when this act has been corroborated by circumstances that she did not tell anybody about the sexual intercourse with the accused appellant till she became pregnant.

PRE_RELIED : 
                      In such a case conviction of accused for offence of rape is not proper."
 12] In case of Vettikuzhiyil Jaison alias Jose ..vs..
              

PRE_RELIED : The State, reported in 2003 Cri.L.J. 2482 the learned Single Judge of the Kerla High Court held that : "Evidence on record shows that prosecutrix was above 16 years of age on date of commission of alleged offence -

PRE_RELIED : According to prosecutrix accused had sexual intercourse with her on three occasions - Prosecutrix, however, not divulging incident to anybody till she was found pregnant by doctor - Prosecutrix not even offered resistance when accused attempted to have sexual intercourse with her in her own house  Nor raised alarm to draw attention of neighbours or escaped from house  

PRE_RELIED : No marks of injury found on private parts

PRE_RELIED : Held, entire conduct of prosecutrix shows that she was a consenting party."

PRE_RELIED : 
 13] In case of Uday ..vs..State of Karnataka reported in (2003)4 SCC 46, their lordship explained the term 'consent' occurring under section 90 and held that "burden is on the prosecution to prove each and every ingredient of the offence, absence of consent being one of them".
              14]


Id : 4253
PRE_RELIED : 
 14. The legal implications with regard to a private complaint being filed and the Police Report is submitted on the same facts, what should be done by the Courts is also very well enunciated in a decision reported in Parmanand Sisodia Vs. Madhukar reported in 2002 Crl. L.J. 3640.

PRE_RELIED : The Madhya Pradesh High Court has held that : "When a private complaint is filed, cognizance is taken, by that time FIR was also filed with Police, the Magistrate called the police report and charge sheet filed.

PRE_RELIED : The private complaint would be deemed to have been merged in police report, accused were discharged by this High Court in the appeal filed against framing of charges, question of permitting complainant to adduce additional evidence thereafter would not arise".

PRE_RELIED : 
 It is further stated in the said decision that : "when the private complaint is deemed to be merged in the police report as envisaged under Section 210(2) of Criminal Procedure Code and in the said case the accused persons have already been discharged, the question of permitting the complainant to adduce evidence in the private complaint would nor arise"

PRE_RELIED : 
 25. Moreover, the Apex Court in a decision reported in 2013 (1) Kar.L.J. 591 SC between Govindaraju alias Govinda Vs. State by Sriramapuram P.S. and another has laid down certain principles as to under what circumstance the Appellate Court could interfere with the judgment of acquittal recorded by the Trial Court i.e. to say : "The Appellate Court can interfere with the judgment of acquittal but normally should not substitute its views unless it records the reasons that findings recorded by the Lower Court are erroneous, contrary to the settled principles of criminal law and the judgment of acquittal is perverse on facts or law".


Id : 4233
PRE_RELIED : We have examined this issue in the light of the Judgment pronounced by the Apex Court in Rotork Controls Case (supra,) wherein the three tests are laid down to recognize a provision under the Act.

PRE_RELIED : This view is confirmed by the ITAT placing reliance on the Judgment of the Apex Court in Indo Nippan's case (supra).

PRE_RELIED : This view is supported by the Judgment of the Apex Court in Berger Paint India Ltd. v/s CIT, Calcutta reported in (2004)12 SCC 42.


Id : 4162

Id : 4232

Id : 4225

Id : 4237

Id : 4101
PRE_RELIED : 
 14.        In its judgment in the case of State of U.P. .vs.
 Babul Nath (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows:- "8.

PRE_RELIED : It may here be noticed that Section 375 of the IPC defines rape and the Explanation to Section 375 reads as follows: "Explanation.- Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse necessary to the offence of rape."
 

PRE_RELIED : "
 15.  It has been further held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Aman Kumar and another .vs. State of Haryana (supra) as follows:- "7. .........The rupture of hymen is by no means necessary to constitute the offence of rape.

PRE_RELIED : Even a slight penetration in the vulva is sufficient to constitute the offence of rape and rupture of the hymen is not necessary.

PRE_RELIED : Vulva penetration with or without violence is as much rape as vaginal penetration.

PRE_RELIED : The statute merely requires evidence of penetration, and this may occur with the hymen remaining intact.

PRE_RELIED : The actus reus is complete with penetration.

PRE_RELIED : It is well settled that the prosecutrix cannot be considered as accomplice and, therefore, her testimony cannot be equated with that of an accomplice in an offence of rape.

PRE_RELIED : In examination of genital organs, state of hymen offers the most reliable clue.

PRE_RELIED : 
While examining the hymen, certain anatomical characteristics should be remembered before assigning any significance to the findings.

PRE_RELIED : The shape and the texture of the hymen is variable.

PRE_RELIED : 
This variation, sometimes permits penetration without injury.

PRE_RELIED : This is possible because of the peculiar shape of the orifice or increased elasticity.

PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, sometimes the hymen may be more firm, less elastic and gets stretched and lacerated earlier.

PRE_RELIED : Thus a relatively less forceful penetration may not give rise to injuries ordinarily possible with a forceful attempt.

PRE_RELIED : 
The anatomical feature with regard to hymen which merits consideration is its anatomical situation.

PRE_RELIED : Next to hymen in positive importance, but more than that in frequency, are the injuries on labia majora.

PRE_RELIED : These, viz. labia majora are the first to be encountered by the male organ.

PRE_RELIED : They are subjected to blunt forceful blows, depending on the vigour and force used by the accused and counteracted by the victim.

PRE_RELIED : Further, examination of the females for marks of injuries elsewhere on the body forms a very important piece of evidence.

PRE_RELIED : To constitute the offence of rape, it is not necessary that there should be complete penetration of the penis with emission of semen and rupture of hymen.

PRE_RELIED : Partial penetration within the labia majora of the vulva or pudendum with or without emission of semen is sufficient to constitute the offence of rape as defined in the law.

PRE_RELIED : The depth of penetration is immaterial in an offence punishable under Section 376 IPC.
 16.

PRE_RELIED : It has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Himachal Pradesh .vs. Raghubir Singh (1993) 2 Supreme Court Cases 622 that there is no legal compulsion to look for corroboration of the evidence of the prosecutrix before recording an order of conviction and that conviction can be recorded on the sole testimony of the prosecutrix.
 20.  In the instant case, not only is the evidence of the prosecutrix sufficient to prove the guilt of the accused, the evidence of the two aforesaid eyewitnesses fully supports the case of the prosecution.

PRE_RELIED : 
 28.  In order to decide whether the quantum of sentence imposed by the Special Court is sufficient and whether enhancement is necessary, it would be relevant to appreciate the position of law in this regard laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Shyam Narain .vs. State (NCT of Delhi) (supra).

PRE_RELIED : The relevant portions of the judgment read as follows:- "14.

PRE_RELIED : Primarily it is to be borne in mind that sentencing for any offence has a social goal.

PRE_RELIED : 
Sentence is to be imposed regard being had to the nature of the offence and the manner in which the offence has been committed.

PRE_RELIED : The fundamental purpose of imposition of sentence is based on the principle that the accused must realise that the crime committed by him has not only created a dent in his life but also a concavity in the social fabric.

PRE_RELIED : The purpose of just punishment is designed so that the individuals in the society which ultimately constitute the collective do not suffer time and again for such crimes.

PRE_RELIED : It serves as a deterrent.

PRE_RELIED : True it is, on certain occasions, opportunities may be granted to the convict for reforming himself but it is equally true that the principle of proportionality between an offence committed and the penalty imposed are to be kept in view.

PRE_RELIED : While carrying out this complex exercise, it is obligatory on the part of the Court to see the impact of the offence on the society as a whole and its ramifications on the immediate collective as well as its repercussions on the victim.

PRE_RELIED : 
........

PRE_RELIED : 26. It is seemly to note that the legislature, while prescribing a minimum sentence for a term which shall not be less than ten years, has also provided that the sentence may be extended upto life.

PRE_RELIED : The legislature, in its wisdom, has left it to the discretion of the Court.

PRE_RELIED : Almost for the last three decades, this Court has been expressing its agony and distress pertaining to the increased rate of crimes against women.

PRE_RELIED : The eight year old girl, who was supposed to spend time in cheerfulness, was dealt with animal passion and her dignity and purity of physical frame was shattered.

PRE_RELIED : The plight of the child and the shock suffered by her can be well visualised.

PRE_RELIED : 
The torment on the child has the potentiality to corrode the poise and equanimity of any civilized society.

PRE_RELIED : The age old wise saying that "child is a gift of the providence" enters into the realm of absurdity.

PRE_RELIED : The young girl, with efflux of time, would grow with traumatic experience, an unforgettable shame.

PRE_RELIED : She shall always be haunted by the memory replete with heavy crush of disaster constantly echoing the chill air of the past forcing her to a state of nightmarish melancholia.

PRE_RELIED : She may not be able to assert the honour of a woman for no fault of hers.

PRE_RELIED : 
 27. Respect for reputation of women in the society shows the basic civility of a civilised society.

PRE_RELIED : No member of society can afford to conceive the idea that he can create a hollow in the honour of a woman.

PRE_RELIED : Such thinking is not only lamentable but also deplorable.

PRE_RELIED : It would not be an exaggeration to say that the thought of sullying the physical frame of a woman is the demolition of the accepted civilized norm, i.e., "physical morality".

PRE_RELIED : In such a sphere, impetuosity has no room.

PRE_RELIED : The youthful excitement has no place.

PRE_RELIED : It should be paramount in everyone's mind that, on one hand, the society as a whole cannot preach from the pulpit about social, economic and political equality of the sexes and, on the other, some perverted members of the same society dehumanize the woman by attacking her body and ruining her chastity.

PRE_RELIED : It is an assault on the individuality and inherent dignity of a woman with the mindset that she should be elegantly servile to men.

PRE_RELIED : Rape is a monstrous burial of her dignity in the darkness.

PRE_RELIED : It is a crime against the holy body of a woman and the soul of the society and such a crime is aggravated by the manner in which it has been committed.

PRE_RELIED : We have emphasised on the manner because, in the present case, the victim is an eight year old girl who possibly would be deprived of the dreams of "Spring of Life" and might be psychologically compelled to remain in the "Torment of Winter".

PRE_RELIED : When she suffers, the collective at large also suffers.

PRE_RELIED : Such a singular crime creates an atmosphere of fear which is historically abhorred by the society.

PRE_RELIED : It demands just punishment from the court and to such a demand, the courts of law are bound to respond within legal parameters.

PRE_RELIED : It is a demand for justice and the award of punishment has to be in consonance with the legislative command and the discretion vested in the court."
 29.  


Id : 4121
PRE_RELIED : The inference on this question raised by the Tribunal on the facts found is of mixed law and fact and is open to challenge before the High Court on a reference under s. 66 of the Income Tax Act G. Venkataswami Naidu & Co. v. The Commissioner of Income Tax (1).

PRE_RELIED : It was held in The Oriental Investment Co., Ltd. v. The Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay (2), that the question whether the appellants' transactions amounted to dealing in shares and properties or to investment, is a mixed question of law and fact, and that the legal effect of the facts found by the Tribunal on which the assessee could be treated as a dealer or an investor, is a question of law.


Id : 4197

Id : 4289

Id : 4247
PRE_RELIED : 
 9. In S.A. Venkataraman vs. The State6 while dealing with the requirement of sanction under the pari materia provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, it was laid down that the protection under the concerned provisions would not be available to a public servant after he had demitted his office or retired from service.

PRE_RELIED : It was stated:- "... ...if an offence under s. 161 of the Indian Penal Code was committed by a public servant, but, at the time a court was asked to take cognizance of the offence, that person had ceased to be a public servant one of the two requirements to make s. 6 of the Act applicable would be lacking and a previous sanction would be unnecessary.

PRE_RELIED : The words in s. 6(1) of the Act are clear enough and they must be given effect to.
                   

PRE_RELIED : There is nothing in the words used in s. 6(1) to even remotely suggest that previous sanction was necessary before a court could take cognizance of the offences mentioned therein in the case of a person who had ceased to be a public servant at the time the court was asked to take cognizance, although he had been such a person at the time the offence was committed.

PRE_RELIED : ... ..."

PRE_RELIED : 
 For example, in Labh Singh4 it was observed:- "9. In the present case the public servants in question had retired on 13-12-1999 and 30-4-2000.

PRE_RELIED : The sanction to prosecute them was rejected subsequent to 6 [1958] SCR 1037 12 their retirement i.e. first on 13-9-2000 and later on 24- 9-2003.

PRE_RELIED : The public servants having retired from service there was no occasion to consider grant of sanction under Section 19 of the PC Act.

PRE_RELIED : The law on the point is quite clear that sanction to prosecute the public servant for the offences under the PC Act is not required if the public servant had already retired on the date of cognizance by the court.

PRE_RELIED : In S.A.
                   Venkataraman v. State6 while construing Section 6(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 which provision is in pari materia with Section 19(1) of the PC Act, this Court held that no sanction was necessary in the case of a person who had ceased to be the public servant at the time the court was asked to take cognizance.

PRE_RELIED : The view taken in S.A.
                   Venkataraman6 was adopted by this Court in C.R.
                   Bansi v. State of Maharashtra7 and in Kalicharan Mahapatra v. State of Orissa2 and by the Constitution Bench of this Court in K. Veeraswami v. Union of India8.

PRE_RELIED : The High Court was not therefore justified in setting aside the order passed by the Special Judge insofar as charge under the PC Act was concerned."

PRE_RELIED : The statements of law in some of the earlier decisions were culled out by this Court in Inspector of Police and another vs. Battenapatla Venkata Ratnam and another9 as under:- "7.

PRE_RELIED : No doubt, while the respondents indulged in the alleged criminal conduct, they had been working as public servants.

PRE_RELIED : The question is not whether they were in service or on duty or not but whether the alleged offences have been committed by them "while acting or purporting to act in discharge of their official duty".

PRE_RELIED : In Shambhoo Nath Misra v. State of U.P.10, at para 5, this Court held that: (SCC p. 328) "5.

PRE_RELIED : The question is when the public servant is alleged to have committed the offence of fabrication of record or misappropriation of public fund, etc. can he be said to have acted in discharge of his official duties.

PRE_RELIED : It is not the official duty of the public servant to fabricate the false records and misappropriate the public funds, etc. in furtherance of or in the discharge of his official duties.

PRE_RELIED : The official capacity only enables him to fabricate the record or misappropriate the public fund, etc.

PRE_RELIED : It does not mean that it is integrally connected or inseparably interlinked with the crime committed in the course of the 9 (2015)13 SCC 87 10 (1997) 5 SCC 326 14 same transaction, as was believed by the learned Judge.

PRE_RELIED : Under these circumstances, we are of the opinion that the view expressed by the High Court as well as by the trial court on the question of sanction is clearly illegal and cannot be sustained."
 8.

PRE_RELIED : In Parkash Singh Badal v. State of Punjab11, at para 20 this Court held that: (SCC pp. 22-23) "20.

PRE_RELIED : The principle of immunity protects all acts which the public servant has to perform in the exercise of the functions of the Government.

PRE_RELIED : 
                          The purpose for which they are performed protects these acts from criminal prosecution.

PRE_RELIED : 
                          However, there is an exception.

PRE_RELIED : Where a criminal act is performed under the colour of authority but which in reality is for the public servant's own pleasure or benefit then such acts shall not be protected under the doctrine of State immunity."

PRE_RELIED : 
 and thereafter, at para 38, it was further held that: (Parkash Singh Badal case11, SCC p. 32) "38.

PRE_RELIED : In a recent decision in Rajib Ranjan v. R. Vijaykumar12 at para 18, this Court has taken the view that: (SCC p. 521) "18. ... even while discharging his official duties, if a public servant enters into a criminal conspiracy or indulges in criminal misconduct, 11 (2007) 1 SCC 1 12 (2015) 1 SCC 513 15 such misdemeanour on his part is not to be treated as an act in discharge of his official duties and, therefore, provisions of Section 197 of the Code will not be attracted."
 (emphasis already supplied) 12. It has also been observed by this Court that, at times, the issue whether the alleged act is intricately connected with the discharge of official functions and whether the matter would come within the expression `while acting or purporting to act in discharge of their official duty', would get crystalized only after evidence is led and the issue of sanction can be agitated at a later stage as well.

PRE_RELIED : In P.K. Pradhan vs. State of Sikkim represented by the Central Bureau of Investigation13, this Court stated:- "15

PRE_RELIED : . Thus, from a conspectus of the aforesaid decisions, it will be clear that for claiming protection under Section 197 of the Code, it has to be shown by the accused that there is reasonable connection between the act complained of and the discharge of official duty.

PRE_RELIED : An official act can be performed in the discharge of official duty as well as in dereliction of it.

PRE_RELIED : For invoking protection under Section 197 of the Code, the acts of the accused complained of must be such that the same cannot be separated from the discharge of official duty, but if there was no reasonable connection between them and the performance of those duties, the official status furnishes only the occasion or opportunity for the acts, then no sanction would be required.

PRE_RELIED : If the case as put forward by the prosecution fails or the defence 13 (2001) 6 SCC 704 16 establishes that the act purported to be done is in discharge of duty, the proceedings will have to be dropped.

PRE_RELIED : It is well settled that question of sanction under Section 197 of the Code can be raised any time after the cognizance; maybe immediately after cognizance or framing of charge or even at the time of conclusion of trial and after conviction as well.

PRE_RELIED : But there may be certain cases where it may not be possible to decide the question effectively without giving opportunity to the defence to establish that what he did was in discharge of official duty.

PRE_RELIED : In order to come to the conclusion whether claim of the accused that the act that he did was in course of the performance of his duty was a reasonable one and neither pretended nor fanciful, can be examined during the course of trial by giving opportunity to the defence to establish it.

PRE_RELIED : In such an eventuality, the question of sanction should be left open to be decided in the main judgment which may be delivered upon conclusion of the trial."

PRE_RELIED : The offences involved in the case of N.K. Ganguly5 were under Section 120-B IPC read with Sections 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of the Act i.e.
 relating to conspiracy to commit offences punishable under the provisions of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : Secondly, the conclusion was drawn in the context of the facts available therein which is evident from the following: - "35. From a perusal of the case law referred to supra, it becomes clear that for the purpose of obtaining previous sanction from the appropriate Government under Section 197 CrPC, it is imperative that the alleged offence is committed in discharge of official duty by the accused.

PRE_RELIED : It is also important for the Court to examine the allegations contained in the final report against the appellants, to decide whether previous sanction is required to be obtained by the 17 respondent from the appropriate Government before taking cognizance of the alleged offence by the learned Special Judge against the accused.


Id : 4087
PRE_RELIED : In both the impugned judgments, reliance has been placed on the decision of this Court in Income Tax Officer v. Delhi Iron Works (P) Ltd. 2010 (175) DLT 495.

PRE_RELIED : Before the learned DJ-ASJ the ITD had also placed reliance on the decision of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in Income Tax Officer v. Dinesh Kumar Shah (1997) 223 ITR 68.

PRE_RELIED : 
However, following the decision in Premwati v. Raghubans 1992 RLR 223 the learned ASJ held that it was the decision of the Delhi High Court in Income Tax Officer v. Delhi Iron Works (P) Limited (supra) which had to be followed.

PRE_RELIED : 8. This Court has perused the judgment in Income Tax Officer v. Delhi Iron Works (P) Ltd. (supra) which in turn referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Madhumilan Syntex Limited v. Union of India IV (2007) SLT 14.

PRE_RELIED : The relevant paragraphs of the decision in Madhumilan Syntex Limited (supra) read as under: “44.

PRE_RELIED : In the case on hand, in the show cause notice dated March 11, 1991 issued under Section 276B read with Section 278B of the Act, it was expressly stated by the Income Tax Officer, TDS, Bhopal that the Directors were considered to be Principal Officers under Section 2 (35) of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : In the complaint dated February 26, 1992 filed by Respondent No. 2-Commissioner also, it was stated that Appellants were considered as Principal Officers.

PRE_RELIED : In the above view of the matter, in our opinion, contention of the learned counsel for the Appellants cannot be accepted that the complaint filed against the Appellants, particularly against      Appellant       Nos.        2-4   is   ill-founded   or   not maintainable.
 45.     It   was     argued

PRE_RELIED :       that     a separate notice and/or communication ought to have been issued before issuance of show cause notice under Section 276B read with Section 278B of the Act that the Directors were to be treated as Principal Officers under the Act.

PRE_RELIED : In our opinion, however, no such independent and separate notice is necessary and when in the show cause notice it was stated that the Directors were to be considered as Principal Officers under the Act and a complaint was filed, such complaint is entertainable by a Court provided it is otherwise maintainable.

PRE_RELIED : ” 10. As far as the present case is concerned, in the complaint filed before the learned ACMM it is stated by the ITD as under: “1. That the Complainant is an Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax (Assessment) In Charge of the assessment of Accused No. 1 which is a private limited company.         Accused          Nos.   2,   3   and   4   are   the Directors/Principal Officer of the said company and were in charge and responsible to Accused No. 1 for the conduct of its business at the time when the offence, which is the subject matter of this complaint, was committed.

PRE_RELIED : In Madhumilan Syntex Limited (supra) it was held that the proceedings against the Directors would be maintainable as long as the complaint clearly stated that they were being treated as principal officers of the company.


Id : 4111

Id : 4140
PRE_RELIED : The contention predicated on Section 22 of the Mines Regulation Act is made by relying upon the judgment of this Court in Jeewan Kumar Raut and Another v. Central Bureau of Investigation1.
       

PRE_RELIED : The judgment of this Court in State (NCT of Delhi) v. Sanjay.5, it is submitted, is distinguishable as the FIR for the offence against illegal sand mining in Sanjay (supra) was registered suo moto due to non-production of any document to establish mining rights and therefore, the ratio in that case would apply only to cases of illegal mining where the mining lease had already been revoked or there was no subsisting mining lease.
 5.

PRE_RELIED : In Sanjay (supra), a Division Bench of this Court had decided appeals preferred against the conflicting judgments of the Delhi High Court, Gujarat High Court, Kerala High Court, Calcutta High Court, Madras High Court and Jharkhand High Court on the question whether a person can be prosecuted for the offences under Sections 379/114 and other provisions of the IPC on the 2 (1999) 9 SCC 620                                           Page 4 of 17 3 (2017) 2 SCC 18 4 (2008) 3 SCC 674 5 (2014) 9 SCC 772 Criminal Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 10707 of 2019 allegations of illegal mining in view of Section 22 of the Mines Regulation Act, which reads as under: "22.

PRE_RELIED : Cognizance of offences.-- No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or any rules made thereunder except upon complaint in writing made by a person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or the State Government."

PRE_RELIED : 
 Accordingly, in Sanjay (supra) it was held that the investigation of the offences is within the domain of the police and the power of a police officer to investigate into cognizable offences is not ordinarily impinged by any fetters albeit the power must be exercised as per the statutory provisions and for legitimate purposes.

PRE_RELIED : The courts would interfere only when while examining the case they find that the police officer in exercise of the investigatory powers has breached the statutory provisions and put the personal liberty and/or the property of a citizen in jeopardy by an illegal and improper use of the powers or when the investigation by the police is not found to be bona fide or when the investigation is tainted with animosity.

PRE_RELIED : While examining the issue, Criminal Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 10707 of 2019  Page 6 of 17 this Court in Sanjay (supra) took notice of the decision in H.N.
       Rishbud v. State of Delhi6 wherein this Court has held that a defect or illegality in investigation, however serious, has no direct bearing on the competence or the procedure relating to the taking of the cognizance or trial.

PRE_RELIED : The cardinal principle of law as noted by this Court in Directorate of Enforcement v. Deepak Mahajan7 is that every law is designed to further the ends of justice and should not be frustrated on mere technicalities.

PRE_RELIED : The public trust doctrine was cited and applied to underscore the principle that certain resources like air, sea, water, forests and minerals are of great importance to the people as a whole and that the government is enjoined to hold such resources in trust for the benefit of the general public and to use them for their benefit than to serve private interests.

PRE_RELIED : 6. This Court in Sanjay (supra) has cited several decisions wherein the challenge to the prosecution on the ground that there can be no multiplicity of offences under different enactments was resolved and answered by relying upon Section 26 of the General Clauses Act, which we would like to reproduce for the sake of convenience: 6 AIR 1955 SC 196                                            Page 7 of 17 7 (1994) 3 SCC 440 Criminal Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 10707 of 2019 "26. Provision as to offences punishable under two or more enactments.--

PRE_RELIED : Where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two or more enactments, then the offender shall be liable to be prosecuted and punished under either or any of those enactments, but shall not be liable to be punished twice for the same offence."
 Section 26 of the General Clauses Act permits prosecution for `different offences' but bars prosecution and punishment twice for the `same offence' under two or more enactments

PRE_RELIED : . The expression `same offence' has been interpreted by this Court in numerous decisions viz., Maqbool Hussain v. State of Bombay8 with reference to the provisions of the Sea Customs Act and the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947; Om Parkash Gupta v.
 State of U.P.9 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Veereshwar Rao Agnihotri10 with reference to Section 409 of the IPC and Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act; T.S. Baliah v. ITO11 with reference to Section 52 of the Income Tax Act, 1922 and Section 177 of the IPC; Collector of Customs v. Vasantraj Bhagwanji Bhatia12, with reference to the provisions of the Customs Act 1962 and the provisions of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968; State of Bihar v. Murad Ali Khan13 with reference to the provisions of Sections 447, 429 and 379 of the IPC and provisions of the Wildlife 8 AIR 1953 SC 325                                            Page 8 of 17 9 AIR 1957 SC 458 10 AIR 1957 SC 592 11 AIR 1969 SC 701 12 (1988) 3 SCC 467 13 (1988) 4 SCC 655 Criminal Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 10707 of 2019 (Protection) Act, 1972; Avtar Singh v. State of Punjab14 with reference to Section 39 of the Electricity Act, 1910 and the provisions of theft under the IPC; and Institute of Chartered Accountants of India v. Vimal Kumar Surana15 with reference to the provisions of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and offences under Sections 419, 468, 471 and 472 of the IPC.

PRE_RELIED : 
 Elucidating on the provisions of Section 4 read with Sections 21 and 22 of the Mines Regulation Act and the offence under Section 379 of the IPC, it was observed in Sanjay (supra): "69.

PRE_RELIED : Considering the principles of interpretation and the wordings used in Section 22, in our considered opinion, the provision is not a complete and absolute bar for taking action by the police for illegal and dishonestly committing theft of minerals including sand from the riverbed.

PRE_RELIED : The Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that over the years rivers in India have been affected by the alarming rate of unrestricted sand mining which is damaging the ecosystem of the rivers and safety of bridges.

PRE_RELIED : It also weakens riverbeds, fish breeding and destroys the natural habitat of many organisms.

PRE_RELIED : If these illegal activities are not stopped by the State and the police authorities of the State, it will cause serious repercussions as mentioned hereinabove.

PRE_RELIED : It will not only change the river hydrology but also will deplete the groundwater levels.

PRE_RELIED : We would in the end refer to the judgment in Jeewan Kumar Raut (supra) on which considerable reliance was placed by the appellant at the time of the hearing.

PRE_RELIED : We would again advert to the decision in Sanjay (supra) which had overruled the decision of the Calcutta High Court in Seema Sarkar v. State17 wherein the High Court held the proceedings to be invalid and illegal as the Magistrate had taken cognizance on the basis of a charge-sheet submitted by the police under Section 21(2) of the Mines Regulation Act and Section 379 of the IPC, observing that the cognizance was one that cannot be split or divided.


Id : 4124

Id : 4137

Id : 4182

Id : 4070

Id : 4156
PRE_RELIED : Prima facie, receipt of compensation for land compulsorily acquired which forms part of the fixed assets of a Company is of a capital nature: Senairam Doongarmall v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Assam(1), but interest which is statutorily payable on compensation is income and is not capital gain: Dr. Shamlal Narula v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Patiala(2).


Id : 4097
PRE_RELIED : 
The decision is that of Dhakeswari Cotton Mills Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal(1).

PRE_RELIED : This Court observed: "As regards the second contention, we are in entire agreement with the learned Solicitor-General when he says that the Income-tax Officer is not fettered by technical rules of evidence and pleadings, and that he is entitled to act on material which may not be accepted as evidence in a Court of law, but there the agreement ends; because it is equally clear that in making the assessment under sub-s. (3) of s. 23 of the Act, the Income-tax Officer is not entitled to make a pure guess and make an assessment without reference to any evidence or any material at all.

PRE_RELIED : There must be something more than bare suspicion to support the assessment under s. 23(3)."

PRE_RELIED : 
The first decision is the Privy Council decision in Income- tax Commissioner v. Badridas Ramrai Shop, Akola (2).

PRE_RELIED : Lord Russell of Killowen in delivering the judgment of their Lordships made the following observations as respects a "
best of judgment " assessment within the meaning of s. 23 (4) of the Indian Income-tax Act: " The officer is to make an assessment to the best of his judgment against a person who is in default as regards supplying information.

PRE_RELIED : "
We find nothing in those observations which runs counter to the observations made in Dhakeswari Cotton Mills' case(1).
No doubt it is true that when the returns and the books of account are rejected, the assessing officer must make an estimate, and to that extent he must make a guess; but the estimate must be related to some evidence or material and it must be something more than mere suspicion.

PRE_RELIED : 
The next decision is Ganga Ram Balmokand v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab (2).

PRE_RELIED : It was held therein that where the income-tax authorities were not satisfied with the correctness or completeness of the assessees' accounts and, taking into consideration the state of affairs in general and the fact that the assessees had a large business and the profit shown by them was abnormally low in comparison with that of other persons carrying on the same business in the locality, calculated the taxable income by applying a flat rate of 7 per cent., the authorities were justified in applying such a flat rate, and the burden was on the assessees to displace the estimate.

PRE_RELIED : There again, the estimate made was not a pure guess and was based on some materials which the Income-tax Officer had before him.

PRE_RELIED : Din Mohammad J. who gave the leading judgment, observed: " It cannot be denied that there must be some material before the Income-tax Officer on which (1) [1955] 1 S.C.R. 941, 949.
(2) [1937] 5 I.T.R. 464.to base his estimate, but no hard and fast rule can be laid down by the Court to define what sort of material is required on which his estimate can be founded."

PRE_RELIED : 
The decision of the Lahore High Court in Seth Gurmukh Singh v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Punjab (3) was specifically approved by this Court in Dhakeswari Cotton Mills' case (2).


Id : 4108

Id : 4099

Id : 4275

Id : 4251

Id : 4267
PRE_RELIED : Exclusion of Acropetal Technologies Ltd. (Seg) is covered in favour of the assessee by the same tribunal order rendered in the case of Applied materials India Pvt. Ltd. vs. ACIT (Supra).

PRE_RELIED : Respectfully following Vs. M/s. Commscope Networks (India) Pvt. Ltd., 10/14 the same, we uphold its exclusion.

PRE_RELIED : Exclusion of 1) e  Zest Solutions Ltd., 2) Infosys Ltd., 3) Larsen & Toubro Infotech Ltd., 4) Persistent Systems & Solutions Ltd., 5) Persistent Systems Ltd., 6) Sasken Communication Technologies Ltd.
and 7) Tata Elxsi Ltd. are also covered in favour of the assessee by the same tribunal order rendered in the case of Applied materials India Pvt. Ltd. vs. ACIT (Supra).

PRE_RELIED : Exclusion of E  Infochips Ltd.

PRE_RELIED : 
is covered in favour of the assessee by the tribunal order rendered in the case of Saxo India Pvt. Ltd. vs. ACIT in ITA No.6148/Del/2015 dated 05-02-2016 Para 10.1 & 10.2 available at pages 221 to 223.

PRE_RELIED : 10. In the result, the appeal of the assessee and revenue are partly allowed".
 5.

PRE_RELIED : This Court in ITA No.536/2015 C/w ITA No.537/2015    delivered           on  25.06.2018 (Prl. Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr. Vs.
 M/s. Softbrands India Pvt. Ltd.,) has held that in these type of cases, unless an ex-facie perversity in the findings of the learned Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is established by the appellant, the appeal at the instance of an assessee or the Revenue under Section 260-A of the Act is not maintainable.
 


Id : 4207
PRE_RELIED : In the decision reported in 2003(7) SCC 141, supra, the Apex Court has held that "It is true that the incident in question has prematurely terminated the life of twenty-one people and the number of deaths cannot be the sole criterion for awarding the maximum punishment of death."

PRE_RELIED : In the decision reported in (2011)10 SCC 389, supra, Apex Court has held that the appellant/Accused would not be a menace to society and no reason to believe that the appellant cannot be reformed or rehabilitated or would constitute a continued threat to society and it is not the `rarest of the rare case' causing for extreme penalty of death.

PRE_RELIED : In the decision reported in (2011)13 SCC 706, supra, the Apex Court has held that murder committed in a very brutal and inhuman fashion alone cannot justify death sentence and in the absence of any evidence to show that the appellant was a continuing threat to society or was beyond reform and rehabilitation, death sentence cannot be sustained.


PRE_RELIED : In the case of Bachan Singh Vs. State of Punjab reported in (1980)2 SCC 684, the Constitution Bench of the Apex Court has held that "for a person convicted of murder, life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception, and mitigating circumstances must be given due consideration and death sentence can be awarded only in the `rarest of rare cases' and for special reasons to be recorded."

PRE_RELIED : In the decision reported in 2012(4) SCC 289, supra, the Apex Court has held that by drawing balance sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances and examining them in the light of facts and circumstances of the case, concluded that this was not a case where extreme penalty of death be imposed upon the accused and therefore, death sentence awarded to the accused was commuted to one of life imprisonment of 21 years.

PRE_RELIED : In the above-said case i.e., Brijendrasingh's case, the Apex Court has given the cases falling under the category of aggravating and mitigating circumstances.

PRE_RELIED : The Apex Court has laid down the principles to determine whether this case falls within the scope of rarest of rare cases for imposition of death sentence.


Id : 4264
PRE_RELIED : .
9. It is by now wellsettled, as was held in Hari Ram v. State of Rajasthan, (2009) 13 SCC 211, that in light of Sections 2(k), 2(l), 7A read with Section 20 of the 2000 Act as amended in 2006, a juvenile who had not completed eighteen years on the date of commission of the offence is entitled to the benefit of the 2000 Act (also see Mohan Mali v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2010) 6 SCC 669; Daya Nand v. State of Haryana, (2011) 2 SCC 224; Dharambir v. State (NCT) of Delhi (supra); Jitendra Singh @ Babboo Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2013) 11 SCC 193).

PRE_RELIED : It is equally wellsettled that the claim of juvenility can be raised at any stage before any Court by an accused, including this Court, even after the final disposal of a case, in terms of Section 7A of the 2000 Act (see Dharambir v. State (NCT) of Delhi, (supra), Abuzar Hossain v. State of West Bengal, (2012) 10 SCC 489; Jitendra Singh @ Babboo Singh v. State of UP, (supra); Abdul Razzaq v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2015) 15 SCC 637).


Id : 4266
PRE_RELIED : The scheme underlying the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution has been considered in a judgment by the Constitutional Bench of the Hon ble Supreme Court in the case State of W.B. Vs. Kesoram Industries Ltd. And others, (2004)10 Supreme Court Cases 201 .

PRE_RELIED : The observations of the Hon ble Supreme Court in paragraphs 74, 75 and 76 are relevant, they read as under:- 74.

PRE_RELIED : It is necessary to examine the scheme underlying the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.

PRE_RELIED : We are relieved of the need of embarking upon any maiden voyage in this direction in view of the availability of a Constitution  Bench  decision  in M.P.V.Sundararamier & Co. Vs. State of A.P., Venkatarama Aiyar, J., speaking for the Constitution Bench, traced the history of legislations preceding the Constitution, analysed the scheme underlying the division of legislative powers between the Centre and the States and then succinctly summed up the quintessence of the analysis.

PRE_RELIED : It was held, inter alia: 1.In List I Entries 1 to 81 mention the several matters over which Parliament has authority to legislate.

PRE_RELIED : Entries 82 to 92 enumerate the taxes which could be imposed by a law of Parliament.

PRE_RELIED : An examination of these two groups of entries shows that while the main subject of legislation figures in the first group, a tax in relation thereto is separately mentioned in the second.

PRE_RELIED : 
 2.In list II Entries 1 to 44 form one group mentioning the subjects on which the States could legislate.

PRE_RELIED : Entries 45 to 63 in that list form another group, and they deal with taxes.

PRE_RELIED : (AIR p.493, para 51)

PRE_RELIED : 3.Taxation is not intended to be comprised in the main subject in which it might on an extended construction be regarded as included, but is treated as a distinct matter for purposes of legislative competence.

PRE_RELIED : And this distinction is also manifest in the language of Article 248 clauses (1) and (2) and of Entry 97 in List I of the Constitution.

PRE_RELIED : Under the Scheme of the entries in the lists, taxation is regarded as a distinct matter and is separately set out.

PRE_RELIED : (AIR 494, paras 51 & 55)

PRE_RELIED : 4.The entries in the legislative lists must be construed broadly and not narrowly or in a pedantic manner.(AIR p.494, para 56)

PRE_RELIED : 5.The entries in the two lists  Lists I and II must be construed, if possible, so as to avoid conflict.

PRE_RELIED : Faced with a suggested conflict between entries in List I and List II, what has first to be decided is whether there is any conflict.

PRE_RELIED : 
 If there is none, the question of application of the non obstante clause subject to does not arise.

PRE_RELIED : And, if there be conflict, the correct approach to the question is to see whether it was possible to effect a reconciliation between the two entries so a s to avoid a conflict and overlapping.

PRE_RELIED : 
 Illustration

PRE_RELIED : If it is possible to construe Entry 42 in List I as not including tax on inter-State sales it should be so construed and the power to levy such tax must be held to be included in Entry 54 in List II (entries as they existed per- Forty-second Amendment, 1976).

PRE_RELIED :  (See Governor General in Council V. Province of Madras and Province of Madras V. Boddu Paidanna & Sons.

PRE_RELIED : (AIR p.495, paras 56-57) 6.

PRE_RELIED : In the event of a dispute arising it should be determined by applying the doctrine of pith and substance to find out whether between two entries assigned to two different legislatures the particular subject of the legislation falls within the ambit of the one or the other.

PRE_RELIED : Where there is a clear and irreconcilable conflict of jurisdiction between the Centre and a Provincial Legislature it is the law of the Centre that must prevail.

PRE_RELIED : 
 75. Referring to M.P.V.Sundararamier & Co.
Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (as His Lordship then was) speaking for six out of the seven Judges constituting the Bench in Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd.

PRE_RELIED : V. State of U.P. held that under the constitutional scheme of division of powers in the Seventh Schedule, there are separate entries pertaining to taxation and other laws.

PRE_RELIED : A tax cannot be levied under a general entry.

PRE_RELIED : 
 76.  The abovesaid principles continue to hold the field and have been followed in cases after cases.
 General Power of regulation and control does not include power of taxation.
 Applying the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the above said paragraphs to the present case, it can safely be said that because of Entry 40 of List I of the Seventh Schedule, the State legislature does not have power to legislate in relation to the lotteries organized by the Government of India or Government of State under Entry 34 of List II of the Seventh Schedule, but because of that the State legislature will not lose its power under Entry 62 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to impose tax in relation to the lotteries organized by the Government of India or other State under Entry 62 of List II treating it as betting.

PRE_RELIED : There is no debate before us on the question that lottery amounts to betting and it was the admitted position.

PRE_RELIED : 10.  It was then contended before us that though there is specific power vested in the State legislature under Entry 62 of List II of the Seventh Schedule, because of Entry 40 in List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, the Parliament will have legislative competence to levy tax under Article 248 and Entry 97 in List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India.

PRE_RELIED : In our opinion, this submission has also no force, because power to tax is not an incidental power and under the residuary power the Parliament will be entitled to impose tax only if that power is not specifically vested in the State legislature by any entry in List II of the Seventh Schedule.

PRE_RELIED : We can draw support for this conclusion reached by us, by what is observed by the Supreme Court in paragraphs 100 to 107 of its judgment in the case of State of W.B. Vs. Kesoram Industries Ltd.

PRE_RELIED : The scheme of the Seventh Schedule reveals an exhaustive enumeration of legislative subjects, considerably enlarged over the predecessor Government of India Act.

PRE_RELIED : 
 Entry 97 in List I confers residuary powers on Parliament.

PRE_RELIED : Article 248 of the Constitution which speaks of residuary powers of legislation confers exclusive power on Parliament to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or the State List.

PRE_RELIED : At the same time, it provides that such residuary power shall include the power of making any law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of those lists.

PRE_RELIED : 
 It is, thus, clear that if any power to tax is clearly mentioned in List II, the same would not be available to be exercised by Parliament based on the assumption of residuary power.

PRE_RELIED : The seven-Judge Bench in Union of India V. Harbhajan Singh Dhillon ruled, by a majority of 4:3, that the power to legislate in respect of a matter does not carry with it a power to impose a tax under our constitutional scheme.

PRE_RELIED : According to Seervai (Constitutional Law of India, 4th/Silver Jubilee Edn. Vol.3, para22.191): 22.191.

PRE_RELIED : Seven out of the nine Judges who overruled Golak Nath case held, inter alia, that the power to amend the Constitution could not be located in the residuary powers of Parliament.

PRE_RELIED : Hegde and Mukherjea, JJ. held that --

PRE_RELIED : It is obvious that these lists have been very carefully prepared.

PRE_RELIED : They are by and large exhaustive.

PRE_RELIED : Entry 97 in List I was included to meet some unexpected and unforeseen contingencies.

PRE_RELIED : It is difficult to believe that our Constitution-makers who were keenly conscious of the importance of the provision relating to the amendment of the Constitution and debated that question for several days, would have left the important power hidden in Entry 97 of List I leaving it to the off chance of the courts locating that power in that entry.

PRE_RELIED : We are unable to agree with those learned Judges when they sought to place reliance on Articles 245, 246 and 248 and Entry 97 of List I for the purpose of locating the power of amendment in the residuary power conferred on the Union.

PRE_RELIED : 
(emphasis in original) 101.

PRE_RELIED :  Similar views were expressed by five other Judges.

PRE_RELIED : According to Seervai: "The law laid down in Kesavananda's Case is that if a subject of legislation was prominently present to the minds of the framer of our Constitution, they would not have left it to be found by courts in the residuary power.

PRE_RELIED : It is submitted that a fortiori, if a subject of legislative power was not only present to the minds of the framers but was expressly denied to Parliament, it cannot be located in the residuary power of Parliament."
 102.

PRE_RELIED : Vide para 22.194 the eminent jurist poses a question: 22.194.

PRE_RELIED : Does Article 248 add anything to the exclusive residuary power of Parliament under Article 246 (1) read with Entry 97 List I, to make laws in respect of "any other matter" not mentioned in List II and List III, including any tax not mentioned in those Lists?"
and answers by saying __ "The answer is 'No'."
 103.

PRE_RELIED : As to the riddle arising in the context of mines and mineral development legislation by reference to the Entries in List I and List II, Seervai states: "The regulation of mines and mineral development is a subject of exclusive State legislation, but for the limitation placed upon that power by making it subject to the provisions in that behalf in List I.

PRE_RELIED : If Parliament does not exercise its power under Entry 54, List I, the States' power under Entry 23, List II would remain intact.

PRE_RELIED : If Parliament exercised its power under Entry 54,List I, only on a part of the field, as for example, major minerals, the States' legislative power over minor minerals would remain intact."

PRE_RELIED : (para 22.195 at p.2433)

PRE_RELIED : Power to tax must be express, else no power to tax 104.

PRE_RELIED : There is nothing like an implied power to tax.

PRE_RELIED : The source of power which does not specifically speak of taxation cannot be so interpreted by expanding its width as to include therein the power to tax by implication or by necessary inference.

PRE_RELIED : States Cooley in Taxation (Vol.1, 4th Edn): "There is no such thing as taxation by implication.

PRE_RELIED : The burden is always upon the taxing authority to point to the act of assembly which authorizes the imposition of the tax claimed."

PRE_RELIED : (para 122 at p.278).

PRE_RELIED : 
 105.

PRE_RELIED : Justice G.P. Singh in Principles of Statutory Interpretation (Eighth Edition, 2001) while dealing with general principles of strict construction of taxation statutes states :__ "A taxing statute is to be strictly construed.

PRE_RELIED : The well established rule in the familiar words of Lord Wensleydale, reaffirmed by Lord Halsbury and Lord Simonds, means : "The subject is not to be taxed without clear words for that purpose; and also that every Act of Parliament must be read according to the natural construction of its words".

PRE_RELIED : In a classic passage Lord Cairns stated the principle thus : "If the person sought to be taxed comes within the letter of the law he must be taxed, however great the hardship may appear to the judicial mind to be.

PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, if the Crown seeking to recover the tax, cannot bring the subject within the letter of the law, the subject is free, however apparently within the spirit of law the case might otherwise appear to be.

PRE_RELIED : In other words, if there be admissible in any statute, what is called an equitable construction, certainly, such a construction is not admissible in a taxing statute where you can simply adhere to the words of the statute.

PRE_RELIED : Viscount Simon quoted with approval a passage from Rowlatt, J. expressing the principle in the following words : "In a taxing Act one has to look merely at what is clearly said.

PRE_RELIED : There is no room for any intendment.

PRE_RELIED : There is no equity about a tax.

PRE_RELIED : 
There is no presumption as to tax.

PRE_RELIED : Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied.

PRE_RELIED : One can only look fairly at the language used."

PRE_RELIED : (at p.635) 106.

PRE_RELIED : The judicial opinion of binding authority flowing from several pronouncements of this Court has settled these principles: (i) in interpreting a taxing statute, equitable considerations are entirely out of place.

PRE_RELIED : Taxing statutes cannot be interpreted on any presumption or assumption.

PRE_RELIED : A taxing statute has to be interpreted in the light of what is clearly expressed; it cannot imply anything which is not expressed; it cannot import provisions in the statute so as to supply any deficiency; (ii) before taxing any person it must be shown that he falls within the ambit of the charging section by clear words used in the Section; and (iii) if the words are ambiguous and open to two interpretations,  the  benefit  of interpretation is given to the subject.

PRE_RELIED : There is nothing unjust in the tax-payer escaping if the letter of the law fails to catch him on account of Legislature's failure to express itself clearly.

PRE_RELIED : (See, Justice G.P.
               Singh, ibid, pp.638-639).
 107. Power to tax is not an incidental power.

PRE_RELIED : According to Seervai, although legislative power includes all incidental and subsidiary power, the power to impose a tax is not such a power under our Constitution.

PRE_RELIED : It is for this reason that it was held that the power to legislate in respect of inter- state trade and commerce (Entry 42, List I, Schedule 7) did not carry with it the power to tax the sale of goods in inter-state trade and commerce before the insertion of Entry 92A in List I and such power belonged to the States under Entry 54 in List II.

PRE_RELIED : Entry 97 in List I also militated against the contention that the power to tax is an incidental power under our Constitution (See: Seervai H.M.:Constitutional Law of India, 4th/Silver Jubilee Edn, Vol.3, para 22.20) (emphasis supplied).


Id : 4257
PRE_RELIED : 
 5. This Court in ITA No.536/2015 C/w ITA No.537/2015  delivered  on  25.06.2018 M/s.

PRE_RELIED : Software AG Bangalore Technologies Pvt Ltd., 9/11 (Prl. Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr. Vs.
 M/s.

PRE_RELIED : Softbrands

PRE_RELIED : India Pvt

PRE_RELIED : . Ltd.,)

PRE_RELIED : has held that in these type of cases, unless an ex-facie perversity in the findings of the learned Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is established by the appellant, the appeal at the instance of an assessee or the Revenue under Section 260-A of the Act is not maintainable and the relevant portion of the said judgment is quoted below for ready reference:

PRE_RELIED : " Conclusion: 55. A substantial quantum of international trade and transactions depends upon the fair and quick judicial dispensation in such cases.

PRE_RELIED : Had it been a case of substantial question of interpretation of provisions of Double Taxation Avoidance Treaties (DTAA), interpretation of provisions of the Income Tax Act or Overriding Effect of the Treaties over the Domestic Legislations or the questions like Treaty Shopping, Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS), Transfer of Shares in Tax Havens (like in the case of Vodafone etc.), if based on relevant facts, such substantial questions of law could be raised before the High Court under Section M/s.

PRE_RELIED : Software AG Bangalore Technologies Pvt Ltd., 10/11 260-A of the Act, the Courts could have embarked upon such exercise of framing and answering such substantial question of law.

PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, the appeals of the present tenor as to whether the comparables have been rightly picked up or not, Filters for arriving at the correct list of comparables have been rightly applied or not, do not in our considered opinion, give rise to any substantial question of law.

PRE_RELIED : 
 56. We are therefore of the considered opinion that the present appeals filed by the Revenue do not give rise to any substantial question of law and the suggested substantial questions of law do not meet the requirements of Section 260-A of the Act and thus the appeals filed by the Revenue are found to be devoid of merit and the same are liable to be dismissed.
 57.

PRE_RELIED : We make it clear that the same yardsticks and parameters will have to be applied, even if such appeals are filed by the Assessees, because, there may be cases where the Tribunal giving its own reasons and findings has found certain comparables to be good comparables to arrive at an `Arm's Length Price' in the case of the assessees with which the assessees may not be satisfied and have filed M/s.

PRE_RELIED : Software AG Bangalore Technologies Pvt Ltd., 11/11 such appeals before this Court.

PRE_RELIED : Therefore we clarify that mere dissatisfaction with the findings of facts arrived at by the learned Tribunal is not at all a sufficient reason to invoke Section 260-A of the Act before this Court.

PRE_RELIED : 
 58. The appeals filed by the Revenue are therefore dismissed with no order as to costs."


Id : 4127

Id : 4126
PRE_RELIED : This Court in Babu and Ors. v. State of Uttar Peadesh (1) held that it was for tic third learned Judge to decide on what points the arguments would be heard and therefore he was free to resolve the differences as he thought fit.

PRE_RELIED : 
This Court in the case of Shankarlal Kachrabhai and Ors. v.
State of Gujarat(1)

PRE_RELIED : said that a mistake by one of the accused as to killing X in place of Y would not displace the common intention if the evidence showed the concerted action in furtherance of pre-arranged plan.


Id : 4179
PRE_RELIED : This Court, in Rameshwar v.
The State of Rajasthan,(1) has declared that corroboration is not the sine que-non for a conviction in a rape case.

PRE_RELIED : The rule, which according to the cases has hardened into one of law, is not that corroboration is essential before there can be a conviction but that the necessity of corroboration, as a matter of prudence, except where the circumstances make it safe to dispense with it, must be present to the mind of the judge .......         

PRE_RELIED : The only rule of law is that this rule of prudence must be present to the mind of the Judge or the jury as the case may be and be understood and appreciated by him or them.

PRE_RELIED : There is no rule of practice that there must, in every case, be corroboration before a conviction can be allowed to stand."
         


Id : 4276

Id : 4109
PRE_RELIED : 
In Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay v. Shapiorji Pallonji Alistry(1) it was held by this Court that in an appeal filed by the assessee the Appellate Assistant Commissioner has no power to enhance the assessment by discovering new sources of income not mentioned in the return of the assessee or considered by the Income-tax Officer in the order appealed against.

PRE_RELIED : In that case, the assesee had received sum of Rs.
40,000.

PRE_RELIED : At page 895 of the Report, Hidayatullah, J. speaking for the Court stated as follows : "The only question is whether in enhancing the assessment for any year lie can travel outside the record, that is to say, the return made by the assessee and the assessment order passed by the Income-tax Officer with a view to finding out new sources of income, not disclosed in either.


PRE_RELIED : 
Reference may be made, in this connection, to the decision in Narrondas Manordass, Bombay v. Commissioner of Income- tax, Central, Bombay(1) in which the scope of the power of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner under s. 31(3) was considered by the Bombay High Court.

PRE_RELIED : In that case, the assessee carried on business at Rajkot and at Bombay, the accounting years at Rajkot and Bombay being different.

PRE_RELIED : With regard to the profits of Rajkot, the Income-tax Officer assessed them proportionately at R.,. 1,17,643.

PRE_RELIED : He also found that there were remittances to the extent of Rs.
4,00,000 from Rajkot to Bombay, but in view of the concession allowed by the Part B States Taxation Concession Order he did not include this amount in the assessable income.

PRE_RELIED : The assessee appealed with respect to the sum of Rs. 1,17,643 contending that the Rajkot business had no profits at all but only loss.

PRE_RELIED : The Appellate Assistant Commissioner thereupon set aside the assessment and remanded the matter to the Income-tax Officer for reassessment after enquiring into tile matters contained in the second report.

PRE_RELIED : 
It was held by the Bombay High Court that the power conferred upon the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was not confined to the matter of Rs. 1,17,643 in respect of which the assessee had appealed, but he had power to revise the whole process of assessment once an appeal had been preferred, and the order remanding the case was not invalid in law.

PRE_RELIED : The decision of this case was approved by this Court in The Commissioner of Income-tax v. M/s Mc-Millan & Co. (2 )

PRE_RELIED : The question to be considered in that case was whether it was open to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner in exercise of his powers under s. 31(3) of the Act to reject the method of accounting followed by the assessee and accepted by the Income-tax Officer, under the proviso to s.
13 of the Act, and compute the income, profits or gains of the assessee under Rule 33 of the Rules.

PRE_RELIED : It was held by this Court that the question must be answered in the affirmative and there was nothing in s. 31 read (1) 31 I. T. R. 909.
L7Sup .C.I./67-3 (2) [1958] S. C. R. 689.with the provisions of s. 13 of the Act which prevented the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, in an appeal preferred by the assessee from exercising the powers which the Income-tax Officer could exercise under the proviso to s. 13 of the Act and to enhance the taxable income of the assessee.

PRE_RELIED : At page 701 of the Report, S. K. Das, J. quoted with approval the following passage from the judgment of Chagla, C.J. in Narronadas's case(1) "It is clear that the Appellate Assistant Commissioner has been constituted a revising authority against the decisions of the Income- tax Officer; a revising authority not in the narrow sense of revising what is the subject- matter of the appeal, not in the sense of revising those matters about which the assessee makes a grievance, but a revising authority in the sense that once the appeal is before him he ran revise not only the ultimate computation arrived at by the Income-tax Officer but he can revise every process which led to the ultimate computation or assessment.

PRE_RELIED : Even if the assessee refuses to appeal at the hearing, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner can proceed with the enquiry and if he finds that there, has be-en an under-assessment, he can enhance the assessment Commissioner of Income-tax, Punjab v. Nawab Shah Nawaz Khan(1).

PRE_RELIED : In this context reference may be made to the decision of the Court of Appeal in The King v. Income Tax Special Commissioners(2) in which the taxpayer sought to withdraw a notice, of appeal which had been given on his behalf against an additional assessment under Sch. D.

PRE_RELIED : The Commissioners of Inland Revenue were not satisfied that the assessment was adequate The Special Commissioners then proposed to proceed with the hearing of the appeal in the ordinary way.

PRE_RELIED : At that stage the taxpayer sought a writ of prohibition to prohibit the Special Commissioners from hearing the appeal.

PRE_RELIED : It was held by the Court of Appeal that notice of appeal having once been given, the Commissioners were bound to proceed in accordance with the Income Tax Acts and determine the true amount of the assessment.

PRE_RELIED : At page 493 of the Report Lord Wright observed as follows : " -in making the assessment and in dealing with the appeals, the Commissioners are exercising statutory authority and a statutory duty which they are bound to carry out.

PRE_RELIED : They are not in the position of judges deciding an issue between two particular parties.

PRE_RELIED : Their obligation is wider than that.

PRE_RELIED : It is to exercise their judgment on such material as comes before them and to obtain any material which they think- is necessary and which they ought to have, and on that material to make the assessment or the estimate which the law requires them to make.

PRE_RELIED : They are not deciding a case interparties; they are assessing or estimating the amount on which, in the interests of the country at large, the tax- payer ought to be taxed."
 


Id : 4250
PRE_RELIED : It is well settled in law that in the absence of reopening of the completed assessment by a show cause notice within the period of limitation prescribed under the Act, no demand can be raised and if the show cause notice issued is beyond time, then the said show cause notice issued is liable to be quashed and set aside [See Sarabai Chemicals V/s. Collector of Central Excise (2005 (2) S.C.C. 168)].

PRE_RELIED : We may refer to the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Commissioner of Central Excise V/s. Dabur India Ltd. (183 E.L.T. 308 S.C.) in that behalf.


Id : 4085

Id : 4107
PRE_RELIED : It is true that in the present Code, the unmistakable shift in legislative emphasis is on life imprisonment for murder as the rule and capital sentence an exception, to be resorted to for reasons to be stated (Edige Annamma, 1974 SC 799, AIR).


Id : 4282

Id : 4234

Id : 4133
PRE_RELIED : The Supreme Court in the matter of B. C. Srinivasa Shetty (supra) was dealing with the issue whether the transfer of the goodwill by partnership firm can give rise to a capital gain tax under Section 45 of the said Act.

PRE_RELIED : The Apex Court held that where the cost of acquisition of the capital asset is nil then the computation provision fails and the transfer of goodwill not give rise to capital gains tax.

PRE_RELIED : Prior to the amendment made to Section 55(2) by the Finance Act, 2001 effective from 1/4/2002 by adding the words "trade mark or brand name associated with the business" self generated assets such as trademark did not have any cost of acquisition.

PRE_RELIED : Therefore for the period under consideration the computation provision under Section 48 of the said Act fails resulting in such transfer of trade marks not being chargeable to capital gains tax.

PRE_RELIED : Further as held by the Supreme Court in the matter of Dy. CIT v/s. Core Health Care ltd. reported in 298 ITR 194 that a provision introduced with effect from a particular date would not have retrospective effect unless it is expressly stated to be so.


Id : 4076

Id : 4153
PRE_RELIED : In fact, a Special Leave Petition filed against the said Division Bench judgment was dismissed by the Supreme Court by way of a speaking order in Commissioner of Income Tax Vs.

PRE_RELIED : Lovely

PRE_RELIED : Exports

PRE_RELIED : (P) Ltd., 216 CTR 195 (SC)

PRE_RELIED : . The Supreme Court in Lovely Exports (P) Ltd. (supra), has held as under:- “2. Can the amount of share money be regarded as undisclosed income under s. 68 of IT Act, 1961?

PRE_RELIED : We find no merit in this Special Leave Petition for the simple reason that if the share application money is received by the assessee company from alleged bogus shareholders, whose names are given to the AO, then the Department is free to proceed to reopen their individual assessments in accordance with law.

PRE_RELIED : 
        Hence, we find no infirmity with the impugned judgment……”

PRE_RELIED : Moreover, it is settled law that the assessee need not to prove the „source of source‟.
 9.     We also find that in the case of the respondent-assessee itself, a Division Bench of this Court in Commissioner of Income-tax v.
 Dwarikadhish investment (P.) Ltd. (2008) 167 Taxman 321 (Delhi) had dealt with a similar issue with regard to the Assessment year 1997- 98.

PRE_RELIED : The relevant portion of the order passed by the Division Bench in the said judgment is reproduced hereinbelow:- “3.

PRE_RELIED : The Assessing Officer required the assessees to furnish details and documents.

PRE_RELIED : The assessees produced copies of sale and purchase bills of the share brokers through whom the transactions took place and photocopies of confirmations of persons who had contributed the fresh share application money.

PRE_RELIED : The assessees furnished the PAN (GIR) numbers of the applicants, the details of the cheque numbers and dates.

PRE_RELIED : 
       The assessees contended that letters sent to the shareholders had not been responded to.

PRE_RELIED : 
       The said decision was upheld by this Court in its order in CIT v. Dwarkadhish Financial Services [2005] 148 Taxman 54.
 7.

PRE_RELIED : The Supreme Court in K.K. Modi Vs. K.N. Modi and Ors., (1998) 3 SCC 573 has held, “It is an abuse of the process of the court and contrary to justice and public policy for a party to relitigate the same issue which has already been tried and decided earlier against him.
 

PRE_RELIED : The reagitation may or may not be barred as res judicata.

PRE_RELIED : But if the same issue is sought to be reagitated, it also amounts to an abuse of the process of the court…..”.


Id : 4218
PRE_RELIED : 
9.     In the case of Ram Das Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Bihar reported at JT 2000 (9) SC 569, the Apex Court while considering the age of the appellant, who was 80 years of age, reduced the sentence to the period already undergone.

PRE_RELIED : Similar view was taken by the Supreme Court in a recent decision rendered in the case of Gurdip Singh Vs. State of Punjab reported at (2013) 10 SCC 395, wherein the court took into consideration the late evening age of the appellant and reduced the sentence already undergone.


Id : 4110
PRE_RELIED : The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Rangappa vs- Sri Mohan, reported in [2010 (11) SCC 441], while analysing Section 139 of N.I.Act, was also pleased to observe that once the issuance of the cheque in favour of the complainant is established, a presumption about the existence of legally enforceable debt forms in favour of the complainant, however, the said presumption is rebuttable.


Id : 4270

Id : 4157
PRE_RELIED : 
 7. In Ajmer Singh (supra), it was held as follows : "7. Section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure lays down that nothing contained in the said Code shall, in the absence of a specific provision to the contrary, affect any special or local law for the time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other law for the time being in force.

PRE_RELIED : The relevant Chapters of the Army Act, the Navy Act and the Air Force Act embody a completely self-contained comprehensive Code specifying the various offences under those Acts and 1 (1987) 3 SCC 340 prescribing the procedure for detention and custody of offenders, investigation and trial of the offenders by court martial, the punishments to be awarded for the various offences, confirmation and revision of the sentences imposed by court martial, the execution of such sentences and the grant of pardons, remissions and suspensions in respect of such sentences.

PRE_RELIED : These enactments, therefore, constitute a special law in force conferring special jurisdiction and powers on court martial and prescribing a special form of procedure for the trial of the offences under those Acts.

PRE_RELIED : The effect of Section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to render the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure inapplicable in respect of all matters covered by such special law.

PRE_RELIED : "
 8. It is clear from the above that the Air Force Act is a special law conferring jurisdiction and powers on the Court Martial and prescribing the procedure for trial of offences.

PRE_RELIED : 
 16. In Union of India & Ors. v. Ex. Flt. Lt. G.S.
 Bajwa2, this Court examined the issue pertaining to the authority competent to convene the Court Martial and held as follows: "44.

PRE_RELIED : A ground was taken before the High Court (Ground f) that the convening of the General Court Martial was signed by an officer, in whose name no delegation or such authority had ever been made.

PRE_RELIED : In reply thereto the appellant had submitted that the convening order was signed by the said officer on behalf of the Air Officer In-charge Personnel, who had after due application of mind, issued the order for convening the above Court Martial.

PRE_RELIED : It was not disputed before us that the Air Officer In- charge Personnel (AOP) was empowered to convene a Court Martial.

PRE_RELIED : The only question which, therefore, requires consideration is 2 (2003) 9 SCC 630 whether the order convening the General Court Martial was passed by the AOP and it was only formally communicated under signatures of the Air Commodore concerned or whether the Air Commodore named therein, who was not empowered, himself passed the convening order.

PRE_RELIED : With a view to avoid any controversy on this factual position, we directed the appellant to produce before us the original file.

PRE_RELIED : We have perused the file and we find that the order for convening the General Court Martial was approved by Air Marshal D.A. LaFontaine, AOP.

PRE_RELIED : 
       There is, therefore, no force in the submission that the convening order was unauthorized and, therefore, illegal."
 17.


Id : 4144

Id : 4248

Id : 4273

Id : 4256
PRE_RELIED : The true position is very clearly put by Lord Sumner in The Prinz Adalbert(1) : " When a shipper takes his draft, not as yet accepted, but accompanied by a bill of lading, indorsed in this way, and discounts it with a banker, he makes himself liable on the instrument as drawer, and he further makes the goods, which the bill of lading (1) L.R. [1917] A.C. 586, 589.represents, security for its payment.

PRE_RELIED : If, in turn, the discounting banker surrenders the bill of lading to the acceptor against his acceptance, the inference is that he is satisfied to part with his security in consideration of getting this further party's liability on the bill, and that in so doing he acts with the permission and by the mandate of the shipper and drawer.


Id : 4191
PRE_RELIED : In Geep Flaslight Industries v. Union of India,[1986]6 ELR 430, the entry or `articles of plastic' was construed to mean as article made wholly of commodity commonly known as plastic to avoid any artificial reading.


Id : 4176
PRE_RELIED : 
 12.  This interpretation was referred in Pandurang Agarbatti V/s.

PRE_RELIED : State of Punjab reported in [1997] 107 STC 56 and G.Radhakrishna Murti & Co. & Ors. V/s.
 

PRE_RELIED : CFTO, Vijaywada reported in [1999] 113 STC 161 (SC).
 


Id : 4249

Id : 4287

Id : 4194
PRE_RELIED : He placed reliance on the decisions in C.K.
Gangadharan v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Cochin (2008) 8 SCC 739 and Commissioner of Central Excise, Raipur v. Hira Cement (2006) 2 SCC 439.

PRE_RELIED : 
 21. In Sole Trustee, Loka Shikshana Trust v. CIT (supra), the Supreme Court explained as under: “The sense in which the word "education" has been used in section 2(15) is the systematic instruction, schooling or training given to the young in preparation for the work of life.

PRE_RELIED : It also connotes the whole course of scholastic instruction which a person has received.

PRE_RELIED : The word "education" has not been used in that wide and extended sense, according to which every acquisition of further knowledge constitutes education.

PRE_RELIED : According to this wide and extended sense, travelling is education, because as a result of travelling you acquire fresh knowledge.

PRE_RELIED : Likewise, if you read newspapers and magazines, see pictures, visit art galleries, museums and zoos, you thereby add to your knowledge.

PRE_RELIED : Again, when you grow up and have dealings with other people, some of whom are not straight you learn by experience and thus add to your knowledge of the ways of the world.

PRE_RELIED : If you are not careful, your wallet is liable to be stolen or you are liable to be cheated by some unscrupulous person.

PRE_RELIED : The thief who removes our wallet and the swindler who cheats you teach you a lesson and in the process make you wiser though poorer.

PRE_RELIED : If you visit a night club, you get acquainted with and add to your knowledge about some of the not much revealed realities and mysteries of life.

PRE_RELIED : All this in a way is education in the great school of life.

PRE_RELIED : But that is not the sense in which the word "education" is used in clause (15) of Section 2.

PRE_RELIED : What education connotes in that clause is the process of training and developing the knowledge, skill, mind and character of students by normal schooling.” 22.

PRE_RELIED : It has to be intrinsically connected to 'education'.
 23.1

PRE_RELIED : In Assam State Text Book Production and Publication Corporation Limited v. CIT (supra), the facts were more or less similar.

PRE_RELIED : There, the Assessee which was initially constituted as „Central Text Book Committee‟ changed its name to the „Assam Text Book Committee‟ with ten members nominated by the State Government.

PRE_RELIED : The Board was then converted into a corporation in 1972.

PRE_RELIED : The entire share capital of the corporation was owned by the Government of Assam.

PRE_RELIED : The Supreme Court disagreed with the High Court.

PRE_RELIED : It noted that “the aim of the said Corporation is to implement the State‟s policy on education”.

PRE_RELIED : It took note of the fact that in the year 1975, the CBDT had granted exemption under Section 10 (22) of the Act to the Tamil Nadu Text Books Society, which had performed activity similar to the Assessee.

PRE_RELIED : The Supreme Court also referred to the decision in Commissioner of Income Tax v.
 Rajasthan State Text Book Board (supra) as well as the decision of the Orissa High Court in Secondary Board of Education v. ITO (supra).

PRE_RELIED : It concurred with the approval of the following operative portion of the judgment in CIT v. Rajasthan State Text Book Board (supra): "It is not disputed before us that the aims and objects of the Tamil Nadu Text Book Society and those of the Respondent-Assessee are almost identical.

PRE_RELIED : It is also not shown to us that the surplus amount, if any, of the Respondent-Assessee, is used for any other purpose or distributed to other members.

PRE_RELIED : The Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) as well as the Tribunal have noticed that even if some amount remains surplus, that is utilised only for the purposes of education.

PRE_RELIED : Thus, having regard to the concurrent findings of fact recorded by the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) and the Tribunal and also taking note of the letter of the Central Board of Direct Taxes itself, it is not possible for us to say that the order of the Tribunal is erroneous in any way.

PRE_RELIED : In this way, no question of law arises for consideration much less a substantial question of law.” 23.5

PRE_RELIED : The Supreme Court in Assam State Text Book Production and Publication Corporation Limited v. CIT (supra) concluded as under: “Following the judgement of the Rajasthan High Court, we are of the view that, in this case, the High Court, in its impugned judgement, has not considered the historical background in which the Corporation came to be constituted; secondly, the High Court ought to have considered the source of funding, the share-holding pattern and aspects, such as return on Investment; thirdly, it has not considered the letters issued by C.B.D.T. which are referred to in the judgement of the Rajasthan High Court granting benefit of exemption to various Board/Societies in the country under Section 10(22) of the Act; fourthly, it has failed to consider the judgements mentioned hereinabove; and lastly, it has failed to consider the letter of the Central Government dated 9th July, 1973, to the effect that all State- controlled Educational Committee(s)/Board(s) have been constituted to implement the educational policy of the State(s); consequently, they should be treated as educational institution.” 24.

PRE_RELIED : In Institute of Chartered Accountants of India v. DGIT (supra), the question that arose before this Court was whether the Petitioner-Institute could be denied exemption in view of the proviso to Section 2 (15) of the Act since it was engaged in activity of „advancement of any other object of general public utility.‟

PRE_RELIED : Although the Court held that the Petitioner could not be recognized as an educational institute, it accepted the plea that the Petitioner there was engaged in advancement of any other object of the general public utility.

PRE_RELIED : The Court concluded that merely because there was profit generated as a result of the activity it could not be concluded that the „institute‟ should be disentitled to exemption.

PRE_RELIED : It was held that “a very narrow view had been taken that the Institute was holding coaching classes and that this amounted to business” and that therefore, „the question whether the Institute carried on business had not been examined with proper perspective.”

PRE_RELIED : 25. In Commissioner of Income Tax v. M.P. Rajya Pathya Pustak Nigam (2009) 226 CTR 497 (MP) the Madhya Pradesh High Court held as under: “17.

PRE_RELIED : From a perusal of the aforesaid decisions, it is lucid that for the entitlement for getting exemption for the assessment year, it is required to see the activities of the Assessee.

PRE_RELIED : That is the acid test.

PRE_RELIED : If the income/profit is applied for non-educational purposes, it is decided only at the end of the financial year.

PRE_RELIED : It is to be seen whether the Assessee is engaged in any kind of educational activities.

PRE_RELIED : The authorities which we have referred to above have laid down the criteria under what circumstances an Assessee can claim exemption being involved in educational purposes and how the income is spent.” 26.

PRE_RELIED : In Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations v. Director General of Income-Tax (Exemptions) (2014) 362 ITR 436 (Del) the Court held the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations to be an educational institution and quashed the order which denied it exemption under Section 10 (23c) (vi) of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : It was reiterated as under:

PRE_RELIED : “It is, therefore, clear that courts have laid emphasis on the activity undertaken, while construing or deciding whether or not a particular institution can be regarded as an educational institution.

PRE_RELIED : The courts have repeatedly held that the holding of classes is not mandatory for an institution to qualify and to be treated as an educational institution.
        

PRE_RELIED : 
 30. In Parashuram Pottery Works Ltd. v. Income Tax Officer (1977) 106 ITR 1 (SC) the Supreme Court explained the rule of consistency in tax matters as under: "We are aware of the fact that strictly speaking res judicata does not apply to income-tax proceedings.

PRE_RELIED : Again, each assessment year being a unit, what is decided in one year may not apply in the following year but where a fundamental aspect permeating through the different assessment years has been found as a fact one way or the other and parties have allowed that position to be sustained by not challenging the order, it would not be at all appropriate to allow the position to be changed in a subsequent year.

PRE_RELIED : 
 "On these reasonings in the absence of any material change justifying the Revenue to take a different view of the matter - and if there was no change it was in support of the Assessee - we do not think the question should have been reopened and contrary to what had been decided by the Commissioner of Income Tax in the earlier proceedings, a different and contradictory stand should have been taken."
 31.

PRE_RELIED : In Radhasoami Satsang Saomi Bagh v. Commissioner of Income Tax (supra), the Supreme Court reiterated the above legal position.

PRE_RELIED : This time it quoted with approval the following extract from Hoystead v. Commissioner of Taxation 1926 AC 155 (PC): "Parties are not permitted to begin fresh litigation because of new views they may entertain of the law of the case, or new versions which they present as to what should be a proper apprehension by the court of the legal result either of the construction of the documents or the weight of certain circumstances.

PRE_RELIED : If this were permitted, litigation would have no end, except when legal ingenuity is exhausted.

PRE_RELIED : It is a principle of law that this cannot be permitted and there is abundant authority reiterating that principle.

PRE_RELIED : Thirdly, the same principle, namely, that of setting to rest rights of litigants, applies to the case where a point, fundamental to the decision, taken or assumed by the Plaintiff and traversable by the Defendant, has not been traversed.

PRE_RELIED : In that case also a Defendant is bound by the judgment, although it may be true enough that subsequent light or ingenuity might suggest some traverse which had not been taken."
 32.

PRE_RELIED : Recently, in CIT v. Excel Industries (supra), the above legal position was reaffirmed by the Supreme Court.

PRE_RELIED : On the facts of that case it was held: "31.

PRE_RELIED : It appears from the record that in several assessment years, the Revenue accepted the order of the Tribunal in favour of the Assessee and did not pursue the matter any further but in respect of some assessment years the matter was taken up in appeal before the Bombay High Court but without any success.


Id : 4195

Id : 4077

Id : 4187
PRE_RELIED : 
 9. In a decision reported in (2018) 3 SCC 22 in the case of Dataram Singh v. State of Uttara Pradesh and Another, the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under: "A fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is the presumption of innocence, meaning thereby that a person is believed to be innocent until found guilty.


Id : 4285

Id : 4281

Id : 4184
PRE_RELIED : In Kanhaiyalal v.
 Union of India 2008 (1) JCC(Narcotics) 23, the Supreme Court has held that the statement made under Section 67 can be used as a confession against the person making it and is not affected by Sections 24 to 27 of the Evidence Act.

PRE_RELIED : This has been followed by this Court in Rehmatullah v.
 Narcotics Control Bureau 2008 (3) JCC (Narcotics) 174.
 Other evidence 13.

PRE_RELIED : In Kishore Chand v. State of H.P., (1991) 1 SCC 286 it was observed (SCC, p.297): “Before parting with the case, it is necessary to state that from the facts and circumstances of this case it would appear that the investigating officer has taken the appellant, a peon, the driver and the cleaner for a ride and trampled upon their fundamental personal liberty and lugged them in the capital offence punishable under Section 302, IPC by freely fabricating evidence against the innocent.

PRE_RELIED : Undoubtedly, heinous crimes are committed under great secrecy and that investigation of a crime is a difficult and tedious task.

PRE_RELIED : At the same time the liberty of a citizen is a     precious one guaranteed by Article 3 of Universal Declaration of Human Rights and also Article 21 of the Constitution of India and its deprivation shall be only in accordance with law.

PRE_RELIED : The accused has the fundamental right to defend himself under Article 10 of Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

PRE_RELIED : The right to defence includes right to effective and meaningful defence at the trial.

PRE_RELIED : The poor accused cannot defend effectively and adequately.

PRE_RELIED : Assigning an experienced defence counsel to an indigent accused is a facet of fair procedure and an inbuilt right to liberty and life envisaged under Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. …..
 13.

PRE_RELIED : Though Article 39-A of the Constitution provides fundamental rights to equal justice and free legal aid and though the State provides amicus curiae to defend the indigent accused, he would be meted out with unequal defence if, as is common knowledge the youngster from the bar who has either a little experience or no experience is assigned to defend him.

PRE_RELIED : It is high time that senior counsel practising in the court concerned, volunteer to defend such indigent accused as a part of their professional duty.

PRE_RELIED : If these remedial steps are taken and an honest and objective investigation is done, it will enhance a sense of confidence of the public in the investigating agency.” 20.


Id : 4229
PRE_RELIED : 
 13. In Vijay Jain v. State of Madhya Pradesh (2013) 14 SCC 527, this Court reiterated the necessity of production of contraband substances seized from the accused before the trial court to establish that the contraband substances seized from the accused tallied with the samples sent to the FSL.

PRE_RELIED : It was held that mere oral evidence to establish seizure of contraband substances from the accused is not sufficient.

PRE_RELIED : It was held as under:- "10.

PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, on a reading of this Court's judgment in Jitendra v. State of M.P. (2004) 10 SCC 562, we find that this Court has taken a view that in the trial for an offence under the NDPS Act, it was necessary for the prosecution to establish by cogent evidence that the alleged quantities of the contraband goods were seized from the possession of the accused and the best evidence to prove this fact is to produce during the trial, the seized materials as material objects and where the contraband materials alleged to have been seized are not produced and there is no explanation for the failure to produce the contraband materials by the prosecution, mere oral evidence that the materials were seized from the accused would not be sufficient to make out an offence under the NDPS Act particularly when the panch witnesses have turned hostile.

PRE_RELIED : Again, in Ashok v. State of M.P. (2011) 5 SCC 123, this Court found that the alleged narcotic powder seized from the possession of the accused was not produced before the trial court as material exhibit and there was no explanation for its non- production and this Court held that there was therefore no evidence to connect the forensic report with the substance that was seized from the possession of the appellant."

PRE_RELIED : After referring to various judgments in Chandrappa and others v. State of Karnataka (2007) 4 SCC 415, this Court summarised the general principles regarding the powers of the appellate court while dealing with an appeal against the order of acquittal and held as under:- "42.

PRE_RELIED : From the above decisions, in our considered view, the following general principles regarding powers of the appellate court while dealing with an appeal against an order of acquittal emerge: (1) An appellate court has full power to review, reappreciate and reconsider the evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded.

PRE_RELIED : 
 (2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation, restriction or condition on exercise of such power and an appellate court on the evidence before it may reach its own conclusion, both on questions of fact and of law.

PRE_RELIED : 
 (3) Various expressions, such as, "substantial and compelling reasons", "good and sufficient grounds", "very strong circumstances", "distorted conclusions", "glaring mistakes", etc. are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate court in an appeal against acquittal.

PRE_RELIED : Such phraseologies are more in the nature of "flourishes of language" to emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with acquittal than to curtail the power of the court to review the evidence and to come to its own conclusion.

PRE_RELIED : 
 (4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case of acquittal, there is double presumption in favour of the accused.

PRE_RELIED : Firstly, the presumption of innocence is available to him under the fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence that every person shall be presumed to be innocent unless he is proved guilty by a competent court of law.

PRE_RELIED : Secondly, the accused having secured his acquittal, the presumption of his innocence is further reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court.

PRE_RELIED : 
 (5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record, the appellate court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court."

PRE_RELIED : 
 The same principles were reiterated in number of judgments viz.
 Jugendra Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2012) 6 SCC 297, State of Uttar Pradesh v. Ram Sajivan and Others (2010) 1 SCC 529, Bhaskar Ramappa Madar and others v. State of Karnataka (2009) 11 SCC 690, Chandrappa and others v. State of Karnataka (2007) 4 SCC 415 and other judgments.


Id : 4149
PRE_RELIED : 
 15.  In a latest judgment reported at 2012(3) SCALE 438 (MANU/SC/0212/2012) in the matter of Bhajju @ Karan Singh Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, the Hon'ble Supreme Court at Para No.12 has stated as under : "12.

PRE_RELIED : The law is wellsettled that a dying declaration is admissible in evidence and the admissibility is founded on the principle of necessity.

PRE_RELIED : A dying declaration, if found reliable, can form the basis of a conviction.

PRE_RELIED : A Court of facts is not excluded from acting upon an uncorroborated dying declaration for finding conviction.

PRE_RELIED : The dying declaration, as a piece of evidence, stands on the same footing as any other piece of evidence.

PRE_RELIED : It has to be judged and appreciated in light of the surrounding circumstances and its weight determined by reference to the principle governing the weighing of evidence.

PRE_RELIED : If in a given case a particular dying declaration suffers from any infirmity, either of its own or as disclosed by the other evidence adduced in the case or the circumstances coming to its notice, the Court may, as a rule of prudence, look for corroboration and if the infirmities are such as would render a dying declaration so infirm that it pricks the conscience of the Court, the same may be refused to be accepted as forming basis of the conviction."

PRE_RELIED : 
 16.  The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Sharda Vs. State of Rajasthan reported at AIR 2010 SC 408 has said at Para 34 as under : "34.

PRE_RELIED : Though a dying declaration is entitled and is still recognized by law to be given greater weightage but it has also to be kept in mind that accused had no chance of cross examination.

PRE_RELIED : Such a right of crossexamination is essential for eliciting the truth as an obligation of oath.

PRE_RELIED : This is the reason, generally, the court insists that the dying declaration should be such which inspires full confidence of the court of its correctness.

PRE_RELIED : The court has to be on guard that such statement of deceased was not as a result of either tutoring, prompting or product of imagination.

PRE_RELIED : The court must be further satisfied that deceased was in a fit state of mind after a clear opportunity to observe and identify the assailants.

PRE_RELIED : Once the court is satisfied that the aforesaid requirement and also to the fact that declaration was true and voluntary, undoubtedly, it can base its conviction without any further corroboration.

PRE_RELIED : It is not an absolute rule of law that the dying declaration cannot be form the sole basis of conviction unless it is corroborated.

PRE_RELIED : 
     The rule requiring corroboration is merely a rule of prudence."
 17.  


Id : 4129
PRE_RELIED : 
 11.        In the judgment in the case of Sameeran Roy vs Smt.
 Leena Roy (supra) relied upon by the learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner, in a similar situation, Madhya Pradesh High Court has held as follows : "8.

PRE_RELIED : At this juncture, I may profitably refer to Section 21 of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : It reads as under : "21. Application of Act 5 of 1908.

PRE_RELIED : Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and to such rules as the High Court may make in this behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be regulated, as far as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908."
 


Id : 4190
PRE_RELIED : 
The Division Bench of this Court in the case of Infinite Builders and Developers, Bangalore (supra) was considering a case where the first appellate authority had granted a benefit more than what was claimed by the assessee.

PRE_RELIED : Similar view has been taken by another Division Bench of this Court in the case of State of Karnataka vs. Centum Industries Private Limited, Bangalore, reported in 2014(80) Kar.L.J.
65.
 9.


Id : 4083

Id : 4209
PRE_RELIED : 
 It has been held in the decision reported in (1994) 7 OCR- at page -91 in the case of Babaji Charan Barick vs. State that a combined reading of section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act and section 304-B of the I.P.C shows that there must be material to show that soon before her death the victim must have subjected to cruelty or harassment.

PRE_RELIED : The prosecution is obliged to show that soon before the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and only in that case the prosecution operates.

PRE_RELIED : This view find vindication in the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court reported in 2014 -58 OCR (SC) 933 in the case of Manoharlal vs. State of Haryana and (2001) 21 OCR (S.C)-621 in the case of Sunil Bajaj vs. State of M.P.
 14.


Id : 4235
PRE_RELIED : 
 In Begu v. The King Emperor (1) the Privy Council had to deal with a case where certain persons were charged under section 302 of the Penal Code, but were convicted under section 201 for causing the disappearance of evidence.

PRE_RELIED : 
Their Lordships upheld the conviction, and while referring to section 237 of the Criminal Procedure Code, they ob- served:-- "A man may be convicted of an offence, although there has been no charge in respect of it, if the evidence is such as to establish a charge that might have (1) (1925) 52 I.A. 191,been made ......

PRE_RELIED : Their Lordships entertain no doubt that the procedure was a proper procedure and one warranted by the Code of Criminal Procedure."


Id : 4118

Id : 4115
PRE_RELIED : The High Court of Gujarat in the case of Commissioner, Central Excise vs Reliance Industries Limited supra, while considering a similar canvas against the payment of interest on delayed refunds under Section 11BB of the Central Excise Act, in terms of the obligation to refund under Rule 5 of the CENVET Credit Rules & Notification dated 18.6.2012, did not accept the canvas on behalf of the revenue that the scheme for refund of unutilized CENVAT Credit is a special beneficial scheme with self contained procedure providing for the manner and method of its implementation, and hence any refund claimed under the Rules would be governed only by the provisions of the Scheme and the general provisions of Section 11BB of the Central Excise Act cannot be resorted to.

PRE_RELIED : The High Court of Gujarat concluded that the CENVAT credit is nothing but duty paid by the supplier of inputs which are dutiable goods manufactured by the supplier or dutiable services rendered by the service provider; when such goods/services are utilized for further manufacture or providing service, which are dutiable, the manufactured goods or service provided carry the duty paid by the Supplier of inputs as a component of its price/value.

PRE_RELIED : Hence, the duty payable on the ultimately manufactured goods/services rendered stands reduced to the extent of duty already paid on the inputs.

PRE_RELIED : Thus, the duty paid on inputs by the supplier has already been actually received by the exchequer.


Id : 4277

Id : 4245
PRE_RELIED : In the Governors of the Rotunda Hospital, Dublin v. Coman(1), the Governors of a maternity hospital established for charitable purposes were owners of a building- which comprised rooms adapted for public entertainments, and which was connected with the hospital buildings proper by an internal passage.

PRE_RELIED : The hospital derived a substantial income from letting the rooms for public entertainments, concerts, etc., for periods varying from one night to six months and applied the income to the general maintenance of the hospital.

PRE_RELIED : The rooms were let upon terms which included the provision of seating heating-, and attendance, but an additional charge was made for gas and electricity consumed.

PRE_RELIED : 
The House of Lords held that the profits derived from the letting of the rooms were assessable to Income Tax under Schedule D, either under Case 1, as the profits of a trade or business, or under Case VI of that Schedule.


Id : 4079
PRE_RELIED : In K.C. Aggarwal v. Delhi Administration(1), this Court has held that a complaint filed by one of the officers of a local authority', at the instance of that authority is in law a complaint institut- (1) Criminal Appeal No. 100 of 1966 decided on 27th May, 1969;ed by that local authority.

PRE_RELIED : This Court refused to entertain for the first time an objection as regards the validity of a sanction granted in Mangaldas Raghavji and Anr. v. State of Maharashtra and Anr.

PRE_RELIED : The correct view of the law on the subject is as stated in the decision of the Allahabad High Court in Nagar Mahapalika of Kanpur v. Sri Ram(2) wherein it is observed: "that the report of the public analyst under s. 13 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 need not contain the mode or particulars of analysis nor the test applied but should contain the result of analysis namely, data from which it can be inferred whether the article of food was or was not adulterated as defined in s. 2 (1 ) of the Act."
 


Id : 4148

Id : 4135

Id : 4228
PRE_RELIED : The reason, supposedly supported by an English decision, is that purchase primarily means acquisition for money paid, not adjusted Upjohn, J. in Habshaw Brothers Ltd. v. Mayer

PRE_RELIED : has circumspectly said : There are no doubt to be found authorities and statutes which have extended that meaning.

PRE_RELIED : In Mr. T.
         Cyprian Williams book, the Contract of Sale of Land, at p. 3 he says: "'sale', in the strict and primary sense of the word, 'means' an agreement for the conveyance of property for a price in money; but the word 'sale' may be used in law in a wider sense and so applied to the conveyance of land for a price consisting wholly or partly of money's worth other than the conveyance of some other land."
 


Id : 4183
PRE_RELIED : This Court in ITA No.536/2015 C/w ITA No.537/2015    delivered           on  25.06.2018 (Prl. Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr. Vs.
 M/s. Softbrands India Pvt. Ltd.,) has held that in these type of cases, unless an ex-facie perversity in the findings of the learned Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is established by the appellant, the appeal at the instance of an assessee or the Revenue under Section 260-A of the Act is not maintainable.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The relevant portion of the said judgment is quoted below for ready reference: " Conclusion: Vs. M/s. Tesco Hindustan Centre Pvt. Ltd 9/11 55.

PRE_RELIED : A substantial quantum of international trade and transactions depends upon the fair and quick judicial dispensation in such cases.

PRE_RELIED : Had it been a case of substantial question of interpretation of provisions of Double Taxation Avoidance Treaties (DTAA), interpretation of provisions of the Income Tax Act or Overriding Effect of the Treaties over the Domestic Legislations or the questions like Treaty Shopping, Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS), Transfer of Shares in Tax Havens (like in the case of Vodafone etc.), if based on relevant facts, such substantial questions of law could be raised before the High Court under Section 260-A of the Act, the Courts could have embarked upon such exercise of framing and answering such substantial question of law.

PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, the appeals of the present tenor as to whether the comparables have been rightly picked up or not, Filters for arriving at the correct list of comparables have been rightly applied or not, do not in our considered opinion, give rise to any substantial question of law.


Id : 4220

Id : 4072

Id : 4091
PRE_RELIED : This position has been settled by this Court in the cases of Gajanand v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1954 SC 695; Kanbi Nanji Virji v. State of Gujarat AIR 1970 SC 219; Puran v.
State of Rajasthan, AIR 1976 SC 912 and Vishvas Aba Kurane v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1978 SC 414.

PRE_RELIED : In the case of The State of Gujarat v.
 Bai Fatima, AIR 1975 SC 1478, it was said that when the prosecution fails to explain the injuries on the person of an accused, depending on the facts of each case, any of the three results may follow :- "(1) That the accused had inflicted the injuries on the members of the prosecution party in exercise of the right of self defence.

PRE_RELIED : 
 (2) It makes the prosecution version of the occurrence doubtful and the charge against the accused cannot be held to have been proved beyond reasonable doubt.
 (3) It does not affect the prosecution case at all."
 The aforesaid three inferences drawn on basis of the nature of injuries were reiterated in the case of Lakshmi Singh v.
 State of Bihar, AIR 1976 SC 2263, and it was further observed:- "It seems to us that in a murder case, the non-explanation of the injuries sustained by the accused at about the time of the occurrence or in the course of altercation is a very important circumstance from which the Court can draw the following inferences: (1) that the prosecution has suppressed the genesis and the origin of the occurrence and has thus not presented the  true version: (2) that the witnesses who have denied the presence of the injuries on the person of the accused are lying on a most material point and therefore their evidence is unreliable; (3) that in case there is a defence version which explains the injuries on the person of the accused it is rendered probable so as to throw doubt on the prosecution case.

PRE_RELIED : The omission on the part of the prosecution to explain the injuries on the person of the accused assumes much greater importance where the evidence consists of interested or inimical witnesses or where the defence gives a version which competes in probability with that of the prosecution one."

PRE_RELIED : A three-Judge Bench in yet another case of Bliaba Nanda Sarma v. The State of Assam, AIR 1977 SC 2252, said:- "The prosecution is not obliged to explain the injuries on the person of an accused in all cases and in all circumstances.

PRE_RELIED : This is not the law.

PRE_RELIED : It all depends upon the facts and                         circumstances of each case whether the prosecution case becomes reasonably doubtful for its failure to explain the injuries on the accused."
                         

PRE_RELIED : In the case of Hare Krishna Singh v. State of Bihar, AIR 1988 SC 863, it was said: "If the witnesses examined on behalf of the prosecution are believed by the Court in proof of the guilt of the accused beyond any reasonable doubt, the question of the obligation of the prosecution to explain the injuries sustained by the accused will not arise.

PRE_RELIED : When the prosecution comes with a definite case that the offence has been committed by the accused and proves its case beyond any reasonable doubt, it becomes hardly necessary for the prosecution to again explain how and in what circumstances injuries have been inflicted on the person of the accused."
                         But in the case of State of Rajasthan v.
                         Madho, AIR 1991 SC 1065, it was held: "If the prosecution witnesses shy away from the reality and do not explain the injuries caused to the respondents herein it casts a doubt on the genesis of the prosecution case since the evidence shows that these injuries were sustained in the course of the same incident.

PRE_RELIED : It gives the impression that the witnesses are suppressing some part of the incident.

PRE_RELIED : The High Court was, therefore, of the opinion that having regard to the fact that they have failed to explain the injuries sustained by the two respondents in the course of the same transaction, the respondents were entitled to the benefit of the doubt."

PRE_RELIED : The onus of the accused under section 105 of the Evidence Act has been examined by this Court in the cases of Partap v. The State of U.P., [1976] 2 SCC 798; Mohan Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 2161; Seriyal Udayar v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1987 SC 1289; Vijayee Singh v. State of U.P., [1990] 3 SCC 190 and Buta Singh v. State of Punjab, [1991] 2 SCC 612.

PRE_RELIED : In the case of Hanumant Govind Nargunadkar v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1952 SC 343.

PRE_RELIED : it was said:- "It is settled law that an admission made by a person whether amounting to a confession or not cannot be split up and part of it used against him.

PRE_RELIED : An admission must be used either as a whole or not at all."


Id : 4114

Id : 4259
PRE_RELIED : , The principle which was applied by this Court in Venkatachalam v. Bombay Dyeing & Mfg. Co. Ltd. (1) is equally applicable here.

PRE_RELIED : 
 No question of law was raised before us, as it could not be in view of the decision of this Court in Narayana Chetty v.
 Income-tax Officer (2), that the proviso was not mandatory in character.


Id : 4212
PRE_RELIED : 
 5. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Gian Singh V/s State of Punjab and another, reported in (2012) 10 SCC Page No.303 has laid down the certain principles as to in what circumstance, the proceedings can be quashed particularly, when the dispute is matrimonial and private in nature.

PRE_RELIED : The said guidelines reads thus: "Held, power of High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from power of a criminal Court of compounding offences under Section 320 Cases where power to quash criminal proceedings may be exercised where the parties have settled their dispute, held, depends on facts and circumstances of each case-before exercise of inherent power under Section 482.

PRE_RELIED : High Court must have due regard to nature and gravity of the crime and its societal impact.

PRE_RELIED : The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Narinder Singh and others V/s State of Punjab and Another, reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466 has held as under: "Cr.P.C. Section 482- Quashment of proceedings on basis of settlement between parties  offence alleged under Section 307 IPC- Falls in the category of heinous and serious offences and generally to be treated as crime against society  

PRE_RELIED : Power of quashment in such cases  guidelines laid down  

PRE_RELIED : Held, only because FIR / charge sheet incorporates provisions of Section 307 IPC would not, by itself, be a ground to reject the petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and refuse to accept the settlement between the parties  

PRE_RELIED : Quashment of proceedings depends on facts and circumstances of each case  


Id : 4280

Id : 4208

Id : 4158
PRE_RELIED : In Commis- sioner of Income Tax, Madras v. Veeraswami Nainar & Ors., 55 ITR p. 35, the Madras High Court took the view that develop- ment rebate reserve should be made at the time of making up the Profits and Loss Account.

PRE_RELIED : This view was affirmed by this Court in Indian Overseas Bank's Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, 77 ITR 5 12..

PRE_RELIED : Both cases arose under the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922.

PRE_RELIED : The Gujarat High Court in Surat Textile Mills Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax Gujarat, 80 I.T.R.P. 1 opted for what may be called a narrow view in assuming that besides Explanation (a) reproduced above explanations (b) and (c) as well too stood wiped out by Indian Overseas Bank's case..

PRE_RELIED : In this connection Veerabha-dra Iron Foundary & Anr. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, 69 I.T.R. 425; Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. v.N.C. Upadhyaya, 96 I.T.R.p. 1 and The Commissioner of Income Tax v. Sardar Singh, 86 ITR 387 (Punjab) may be seen.


Id : 4193

Id : 4161
PRE_RELIED : 
As this Court has held in the Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. v. Kushal Bhan,(1) it is desirable that if the incident giving rise to a charge framed against a workman in a domes- tic enquiry is being tried in a criminal court, the employer, should stay the domestic enquiry pending the final disposal of the criminal case.


Id : 4102
PRE_RELIED : In Bhagia Sahoo vrs. State of Orissa reported in (2002) 93 CLT 684 where his Lordship has observed that when the liquor seized is not produced before the Court and no reason for such non production is provided and the independent witness is not supporting the seizure, the evidence provided by the prosecution is not sufficient for conviction.

PRE_RELIED : The Hon'ble Apex Court upheld in Mukhitiar Ahmed Ansari Vrs NCT of Delhi 2005 31 OCR (SC) 257 that investigation by the same police official who had lodged the complaint is deprecating practice and in absence of any independent corroboration no conviction can be recorded in such a case.

PRE_RELIED : In Shimanchal Choudhury Vrs. State of Orissa reported in 2005 (ii) OLR 40 it has been held by the Hon'ble Court that Excise Officer bearing some experience due to long service can not be termed as an expert in terms of Section-45 of the Indian Evidence Act.


Id : 4128
PRE_RELIED : 
We had occasion to consider this provision in Akhlakali Hayatalli v. The State of Bombay(1) where we approved of the following observations of their Lordships of the Privy Council in Ramanugrah Singh v. The Emperor(2): " The powers of the High Court in dealing with the reference are contained in sub-section (3).

PRE_RELIED : It may exercise any of the powers. which it might exercise upon an appeal, and this includes the power to call fresh evidence conferred by s.
428.

PRE_RELIED : The Court must consider the whole case and give due weight to the opinions of the Sessions Judge and jury, and then acquit or convict the accused.

PRE_RELIED : In their Lordships' view, the paramount consideration in the High Court must be whether the ends of justice require that.

PRE_RELIED : the verdict of the jury should be set aside.

PRE_RELIED : In general, if the evidence is such that it can properly support a verdict either of guilty, or. not guilty according to the view taken of it by the trial Court, and if the jury take one view of the evidence and the, judge thinks that they should have taken the other, the view of the jury must prevail, since they are the judges of fact. In such a case a reference is not justified, and it is only by accepting their view that the High Court can give due weight to the opinion of the jury.

PRE_RELIED : 
It, however, (I) [1954] S.C.R. 435. 442.
(2) A.I.R. 1946 P.C. 151, 154.the High Court considers that upon the evidence no reasonable body- of men could have reached the conclusion arrived at by the jury, then the reference was justified and the ends of justice required that the verdict be disregarded."


Id : 4172

Id : 4255
PRE_RELIED : Vemireddy Satyanarayan Reddy v. The State of Hyderabad.

PRE_RELIED : The discovery of the buttons with bloodstains at the instance of the appellant is a circumstance which may raise the presumption of the participation of the appellant in the murder, In Wasin Khan v. The State of Uttar Pradesh (1), it was held that the recent and unexplained possession of stolen property would be presumptive evidence against a prisoner on a charge of robbery as also of a charge of murder.


Id : 4192
PRE_RELIED : That decision was affirmed by this Court in Kishanchand Lunidasing Bajaj v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Bangalore(2 ).

PRE_RELIED : Therein this Court held that where the shares acquired with the funds of H.U.F. were held in the name of the karta, the H.U.F. could be assessed to tax under the Act on the dividend from those shares.


Id : 4223

Id : 4139

Id : 4167

Id : 4095

Id : 13658

Id : 4254
PRE_RELIED : 16. This Court in Sony Ericsson India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) categorically found that the BLT was not an appropriate yardstick for determining the existence of an international transaction or for that matter for calculating the ALP of such transaction.

PRE_RELIED : 18. This Court has in similar circumstances in a series of decisions including Maruti Suzuki Ltd. (supra); Bausch & Lomb Eye care (India) Pvt. Ltd. v. Additional CIT (2016) 381 ITR 227 (Del) and Honda Siel Power Products Ltd. v. Dy. CIT (2016) 237 Taxman 304 emphasized the importance of the Revenue having to first discharge the initial burden upon it with regard to showing the existence of an international transaction between the Assessee and the AE.


Id : 4165

Id : 4103
PRE_RELIED : In Afrahim Sheikh and others v. State of West Bengal(1) Hidayatullah J. as he then was, has pointed out that it was possible to apply the ingredients of section 34 in relation to the commission of an offence tinder section 304 Part II, even though death is caused with the knowledge of the persons participating in the occurrence that by their act death was likely to be caused.

PRE_RELIED : The sharing of the common intention, as pointed out in that case, is the commission of the act or acts by which death was occasioned.

PRE_RELIED : With reference to section 38, the learned Judge observed at page 178 : "That is to say, even though several persons may do a single criminal act.

PRE_RELIED : the responsibility may vary according to the degree of their participation.

PRE_RELIED :         The illustration which is given clearly brings out that point.

PRE_RELIED : 
 lastly section 38 provide., that the responsibility for the corn pleted criminal act may be of different grades according to the share taken by the different accused in the completion of the criminal act, and this section does not mention anything about intention common or otherwise or knowledge."

PRE_RELIED : 
 (1)[1964] 6 S.C.R. 172.
 The injuries found on the person of the deceased by P. W. 5 Dr. S. Kalita, who held the autopsy over the dead body were of a very severe nature.


Id : 4100

Id : 4163
PRE_RELIED : (See: Yehwant & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra;(1) and Sukh Ram v. State of U.P.)(2).

PRE_RELIED : 
 In Yeshwant's case (supra), the question was whether the acquit(ah of an alleged participant, said to be Brahmanand Tiwari, for the murder of a man called Sukal, could make it impossible to apply the principle of vicarious liability to convict, under Section 302/34 I.P.C., Yeshwant, the only other participant in under.

PRE_RELIED : This Court observed (at p.303): The benefit of this doubt can only go to the appellant Brahmanand Tiwari and not to the other accused persons 13 who were known well to each eye- witness."
 Distinguishing Krishna Govind Patil v. State of Maharashtra (3) this Court said in Yeshwant's case (supra) (at p. 302): "We do not think that this decision which depends upon its own facts, as criminal cases generally do, lays down any general principle that, where the identity of one of the participants is doubtful, the whole case must end in acquittal.

PRE_RELIED : Such a question belongs to the realm of facts and not of law: ` The following cases were also cited before us: Dalip Singh & v. State of Punjab (4) Bharwad Mepa Dana & Anr. v.
 State of Bombay;(5) Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab;(6) Mohan Singh v. State of Punjab;(7) Ram Bilas Singh & Ors. v.
 State of Bihar(8)

PRE_RELIED : In the case of Ram Bilas Singh (supra) previous decisions of this Court on the question argued before us have been considered at some length and a passage from Krishna Govind Patil's case (supra) was also quoted.

PRE_RELIED : 
 Subject to the observations made above with regard to om Pal, we affirm the convictions and sentences and dismiss this appeal.
 P.H.P.                                      Appeal dismissed


Id : 4227

Id : 4136
PRE_RELIED : Vide the observations of the Lord President and of Lord Adam in Maughan v. Free Church of Scotland (1) and the observations of Lord Hanworth, M. R., in Keren Kayemeth Le Jisroel Ltd. v. The Commissioners of Inland Revenue (2) at p. 36 that " the right to exemption under Section 37 must be established by those who seek it.

PRE_RELIED : 
The onus therefore lies upon the Appellants ", and of Lord Macmillian at p. 58 that, " In my opinion, the Appellants, have failed to bring it within any one of these categories and consequently have failed in what was essential for them to make out, namely, that this Company is a body of persons established for charitable purposes only."

PRE_RELIED : Vide Amritsar Produce Exchange Ltd.

PRE_RELIED : In re (3) and Sm. Charusila Dassi and others, In re (4).

PRE_RELIED : So far as exemption under s. 4(3) (viii) is concerned, the matter is concluded by a decision of this Court given subsequent to the decision now under appeal.

PRE_RELIED : In Commissioner of Income-tax v. Venkataswamy Naidu (5), this Court held, reversing the judgment of the High Court of Madras, that it (1) (1803) 3 Tax Cas. 207, 21 O. (2) (1931) 17 Tax CaS. 27.
(3) [1937] 5 I.T.R. 307, 327. (4) [1946] 14 I.T.R. 362, 370.
(5) [1956] 29 I.T.R. 529, 534.was for the assessee to prove that the income sought to be taxed was agricultural income exempt from taxation under s.
4(3)(viii).

PRE_RELIED : Bhacgwati, J., delivering the' judgment of the Court observed: " ... the High Court erroneously framed the question in the negative form and placed the burden on the Income-tax Authorities of proving that the income from the sale of milk received by the assessee during the accounting year was not agricultural income.

PRE_RELIED : In order to claim an exemption from payment of incometax in respect of what the assessee considered agricultural income, the assessee had to put before the Income-tax Authorities proper materials which would enable them to come to a conclusion that the income which was sought to be assessed was agricultural income.

PRE_RELIED : It was not for the Income-tax Authorities to prove that it was not agricultural income.

PRE_RELIED : It was this wrong approach to the question which vitiated the judgment of the High Court and led it to an erroneous conclusion."

PRE_RELIED : 
On the inerits, the question what is agricultural income within s. 2(1) of the Act is the subject of a recent decision of this Court in The Commissioner of Income-tax, West Bengal, Calcutta v. Raja Benoy Kumar Sahas Roy (1).

PRE_RELIED : 
There, it was held that before an income could be held to be agricultural income, it must be shown to have been derived from land by agriculture or by one or the other of the operations described in cls. (i) and (ii) of s. 2(1)(b) of the Act, that the term St agriculture " meant, in its ordinary sense, cultivation of the field, that in that sense it would connote such basic operations as tilling of the land, sowing of trees, plantation and the like, and that though subsequent operations such as weeding, pruning, watering, digging the soil around the growth and removing undergrowths could be regarded as agricultural operations when they are taken in conjunction with and as continuation of the basic operations mentioned before, they could not, apart from those operations, be regarded as bearing the character of agricultural operations.

PRE_RELIED : 
(1) [1958] S.C.R. 101, 155, 158, 160.It is only " observed Bhagwati, J., delivering the judgment of the Court, " if the products are raised from the land by the performance of these basic operations that the subsequent operations attach themselves to the products of the land and acquire the characteristic of agricultural operations..."

PRE_RELIED : 
" But if these basic operations are wanting the subsequent operations do not acquire the characteristic of agricultural operations."

PRE_RELIED : 
Dealing with trees which grow wild, Bhagwati, J., observed : " It is agreed on all hands that products which grow wild on the land or are of spontaneous growth not involving any human labour or skill upon the land are not products of agriculture and the income derived therefrom is not agricultural income.

PRE_RELIED : There is no process of agriculture involved in the raising of these products from the land."

PRE_RELIED : This view is no longer tenable in view of the decision of this Court in The Commissioner of Income-tax, West Bengal, Calcutta v. Raja Benoy Kumar Sahas Roy (1).


Id : 4236
PRE_RELIED : 
 29. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of Sunil Mahadeo Jadhav V/s State of Maharashtra, (2013) 15 SCC 177 has drawn reference to Section 106 of the Evidence Act 1872 which states that when any act is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him.

PRE_RELIED : The accused had stated nothing in this regard in his statement under Section 313 CrPC and also failed to adduce any evidence in defence to explain his defence.

PRE_RELIED : 
 30. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of Phula Singh V/s State of H.P reported in (2014) 4 SCC 9 had rejected the submission that prosecution has to establish each and every fact and accused has a right only to maintain silence.

PRE_RELIED : Adverse inference was drawn against the accused for not at all trying to explain the incriminating circumstances against him.

PRE_RELIED : 
 33. It is pertinent to note that the decision in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh Vs. R.Punnayya, reported in AIR 1977 SC 45, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that when the Court is confronted with the question whether the offence is 'murder' or culpable homicide not amounting to murder', the problem is to be approached in three stages.

PRE_RELIED : The question to be considered at first stage is whether the accused has done an act by doing which he has caused the death of another person.

PRE_RELIED : Proof of such casual connection between the act of the accused and the death leads to the second stage for consideration whether that act of the accused amounts to 'culpable homicide' as defined in Section 299.

PRE_RELIED : 
If the answer of this question is prima facie found in the affirmative the stage is reached for considering the operation of Section 300 IP Code.

PRE_RELIED : This is the stage at which the Court should determine whether the acts proved by the prosecution bring the case within the ambit of any of the four clauses of the definition of "murder" contained in Section 300.

PRE_RELIED : If the answer to this question is in the negative the offence would be culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under the first or the second or the third clause of section 299 is applicable.

PRE_RELIED : If the question is found to be positive, but comes within any of the Exceptions enumerated in Section 300, the offence would still be culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under the first part of section 304.

PRE_RELIED : But sometimes the facts are so intertwined and the second and third stages are so telescoped into each other that it may not be convenient to give a separate treatment to the matters involved in the second and the third stages.

PRE_RELIED : Further the acts and circumstances proved by the prosecution brings the case squarely within the ambit of the four clauses of the definition of "murder' contained in Section 300 IPC.
 34.


Id : 4189

Id : 4269

Id : 4143

Id : 4272
PRE_RELIED : The decision of the Delhi High Court in Commissioner of Income-tax vs.
 Rajasthan Mercantile Co. Ltd.etc. etc.,[1995] 211 ITR 400 is in line with the Gujarat view.

PRE_RELIED : In Brij Raman Dass & Sons (supra), it was held that sub- section (2A) of Section 37 is not an independent provision but is a proviso to sub-section (1) of section 37 since the expenditure falling under sub-section (2A) must necessarily come within sub-section (1).

PRE_RELIED : Thereafter, while considering the meaning of "entertainment" in this context, it was held as under :- " .........

PRE_RELIED : What we have to see is as to what is the meaning of the word "entertainment" for purposes of section 37(2A) of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : In the Income-tax Act, this word has not been defined and we will have to give it its general meaning.

PRE_RELIED : An "entertainment expenditure"
 would, in our opinion, include all expenditures incurred in connection with business on the entertainment of customer and         constituents.

PRE_RELIED : The entertainment may consist of providing refreshments as in this case or it may consist of providing some other sort of entertainment.

PRE_RELIED : In Bentleys, Stokes & Lowless v.
 Beeson (H.M.Inspector of Taxes), [1952] 33 TC 491 (CA), a firm of solicitors incurred expenses in entertaining clients.

PRE_RELIED : The entertainment consisted of providing lunch to the clients.

PRE_RELIED : It was held that expenditure was incurred wholly and exclusively for purposes of business and was an allowable deduction.

PRE_RELIED : We may now refer to the decision of the Delhi High Court in Commissioner of Income-tax vs. Rajasthan Mercantile Co. Ltd. etc. etc., [1995] 211 ITR 400.

PRE_RELIED : The true effect of Explanation 2 added in sub-section (2A) of Section 37 of the Act has been correctly understood therein as under.

PRE_RELIED : 
 "The declaration      and                  the clarification involved in Explanation 2, are only for the purposes of assessments with effect from April 1,1976.

PRE_RELIED : This provision widens the concept of "entertainment expenditure" by including in its scope such of the expenditures which are otherwise traditionally understood as         routine business expenditures incurred in connection with "business-hospitality"

PRE_RELIED : . Therefore, the widened meaning cannot be extended to past periods when the amended Explanation 2 was not in operation."


Id : 4145

Id : 4166

Id : 4171

Id : 4271
PRE_RELIED : 6. However, this Court in a recent judgment in ITA No.536/2015 C/w ITA No.537/2015 delivered on 25.06.2018 (Prl. Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr. Vs. M/s.

PRE_RELIED : Softbrands

PRE_RELIED : India Pvt

PRE_RELIED : . Ltd.,)

PRE_RELIED : has held that in these type of cases, unless an ex-facie perversity M/s.LSI Research (India) P. Ltd., 11/13 in the findings of the learned Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is established by the appellant, the appeal at the instance of an assessee or the Revenue under Section 260-A of the Act is not maintainable.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The relevant portion of the said judgment is quoted below for ready reference: " Conclusion: 55.

PRE_RELIED : A substantial quantum of international trade and transactions depends upon the fair and quick judicial dispensation in such cases.

PRE_RELIED : Had it been a case of substantial question of interpretation of provisions of Double Taxation Avoidance Treaties (DTAA), interpretation of provisions of the Income Tax Act or Overriding Effect of the Treaties over the Domestic Legislations or the questions like Treaty Shopping, Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS), Transfer of Shares in Tax Havens (like in the case of Vodafone etc.), if based on relevant facts, such substantial questions of law could be raised before the High Court under Section 260-A of the Act, the Courts could have embarked upon such exercise of framing and answering such substantial question of law.

PRE_RELIED : On M/s.LSI Research (India) P. Ltd., 12/13 the other hand, the appeals of the present tenor as to whether the comparables have been rightly picked up or not, Filters for arriving at the correct list of comparables have been rightly applied or not, do not in our considered opinion, give rise to any substantial question of law.

PRE_RELIED : 
 56. We are therefore of the considered opinion that the present appeals filed by the Revenue do not give rise to any substantial question of law and the suggested substantial questions of law do not meet the requirements of Section 260-A of the Act and thus the appeals filed by the Revenue are found to be devoid of merit and the same are liable to be dismissed.

PRE_RELIED : 
 57. We make it clear that the same yardsticks and parameters will have to be applied, even if such appeals are filed by the Assessees, because, there may be cases where the Tribunal giving its own reasons and findings has found certain comparables to be good comparables to arrive at an `Arm's Length Price' in the case of the assessees with which the assessees may not be satisfied and have filed such appeals before this Court.

PRE_RELIED : Therefore we clarify that mere dissatisfaction with the findings of facts arrived at by the learned Tribunal is not M/s.LSI Research (India) P. Ltd., 13/13 at all a sufficient reason to invoke Section 260-A of the Act before this Court.
 58.

PRE_RELIED : The appeals filed by the Revenue are therefore dismissed with no order as to costs."


Id : 4222

Id : 4200

Id : 4214
PRE_RELIED : In Suma Das Vrs.State of Orissa reported in 1993(II) OLR- 392,Hon'ble Court has observed that "Chemical test is the surest test for determining the illicit liquor .Other tests are litmus and hydrometer test but can not be said to be surest unless prosecution establishes by evidence that the officer who made the test was specially skilled because his evidence is to be accepted as evidence of expert U/s 45 of Indian Evidence Act.

PRE_RELIED : Simple statement that the officer has been working in the department for a number of years would not attract Sec 45 of Indian Evidence Act".


Id : 4198
PRE_RELIED : 
                         It cannot be doubted that under that section a conviction based merely on the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice may not be illegal, the courts nevertheless cannot lose sight of the rule of prudence and practice which in the words of Martin B in Res. v. Boyes (1) (has become so hallowed as to be deserving of respect" and in the words of Lord Abinger "it deserves to have all the reverence of the law".

PRE_RELIED : The Privy Council in Bhuboni Sahu v. The King (2) when its attention was drawn to the judgment of Madras High Court in re Rajagopal(3) where conviction was based upon the evidence of an accomplice supported by the statement of a co-accused, said as follows :- "Their Lordships................... would nevertheless observe that Courts should be slow to depart from the rule of prudence, based on long experience, which requires some independent evidence, implicating the particular accused.

PRE_RELIED : The danger of acting upon accomplice evidence is not merely that the accomplice is on his own admission a man of bad character who took part in the offence and afterwards to save himself betrayed his former associates, and who has placed himself in a (1) (1861) 9 Cox, Crim. Cas. 32.
 (2) (1949) L.R. 76. I.A. 147, (3) I.L.R. 1944. Mad. 308.
position in which he can hardly fail to have a strong bias in favour of the prosecution ; the real danger is that he is telling a story which in its general outline is true, and it is easy for him to work into the story matter which is untrue".

PRE_RELIED : The law may be stated in the words of Lord Reading C. J. in R. v.
Baskerville (1) as follows "There is Do doubt that the uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice is admissible in law (R. v Attwood, 1787, 1 Leach 464).

PRE_RELIED : But it has been Ion(,, a rule of practice at common law for the judge to warn the jury of the danger of convicting a prisoner on the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice, and in the discre- tion of the Judge, to advise them not to convict upon such evidence, but the judge should point out to the jury that it is within their legal province to convict upon such unconfirmed evidence (R. v Stubbs, Dears 555 In re Heunier, 1894 2 Q.B. 415)".


Id : 4120

Id : 4174
PRE_RELIED : 60. The few of the cases which earmarks the concept of rarest of rare case are Bachansingh Vs. State of Punjab, Billa and Ranga in a case wherein rape and murder of victim was committed and her younger brother who in his tender age showed bravery to stand against the accused was also murdered.

PRE_RELIED : More particularly both of the victims were the children of Officer from Defence guarding the border of motherland.

PRE_RELIED : 
 61. In the judgment rendered by His Lordship Justice Sarkaria and His Lordship Chandrachud and Justice A.C.Gupta and N.L.Untwualia wherein His Lordship Sarkaria rendered the judgment which was the majority view holding the constitutional validity of the death sentence with reference to Art. 19 of the Constitution.

PRE_RELIED : 
 70. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Machhi Singh vs. State of Punjab reported in 1983 SCC (Cri.) 681 has held as under: "38.

PRE_RELIED : In this background the guidelines indicated in Bachan Singh's case (supra) will have to be culled out and applied to the facts of each individual case where the question of imposing of death sentences arises.

PRE_RELIED : The following propositions emerge from Bachan Singh's case: (i) The extreme penalty of death need not be inflicted except in gravest cases of extreme culpability.

PRE_RELIED : 
 (ii) Before opting for the death penalty the circumstances of the 'offender' also require to be taken into consideration along with the circumstances of the 'crime'.

PRE_RELIED : 
 (iii) Life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception.

PRE_RELIED : In other words death sentence must be imposed only when life imprisonment appears to be an altogether inadequate punishment having regard to the relevant circumstances of the crime, and provided, and only provided, the option to impose sentence of imprisonment for life cannot be conscientiously exercised having regard to the nature and circumstances of the crime and all the relevant circumstances.
 (iv) A balance sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances has to be drawn up and in doing so the mitigating circumstances have to be accorded full weightage and a just balance has to be struck between the aggravating and the mitigating circumstances before the option is exercised."

PRE_RELIED : 
 71. In the case of Jagmohan Singh vs. The State of U.P., reported in 1973 SCC (Cri.) 169 the Hon'ble Apex Court has held as under: "Constitution of India  Article 19 (1)  Death sentence if violative of Article 19 (1)  Validity of Section 302 IPC  Relevance of decision of U.S.
         Supreme Court based on Eighth Amendment and due process of law  Freedom to live if included in Article 19(1)."
 72.


Id : 4238

Id : 4117
PRE_RELIED : 
In Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay South, Bombay v. Ogale Glass Works Ltd.

PRE_RELIED : the assessee, a non-resident company carrying on business of manufacturing certain articles in the State of Aundh, secured some contract for the supply of goods to the Government of India.

PRE_RELIED : The contract provided that "unless otherwise agreed between the parties payment for the delivery of the stores will be made on submission of bills in the prescribed form in accordance with instructions given in the acceptance of tender by cheque on a Government Treasury in India or on a branch of the Reserve Bank of India or the Imperial Bank of India transacting Government business."

PRE_RELIED : The assessee submitted the bill in the prescribed form and wrote on it as follows: "Kindly remit the amount by a cheque in our favour on any bank in Bombay."

PRE_RELIED : The assessee received cheques drawn on the Bombay branch of the Reserve Bank of India.

PRE_RELIED : The assessee realised the amount of the cheques through the Aundh Bank.

PRE_RELIED : It was held that the posting of cheques in Delhi in law amounted to payment in Delhi.

PRE_RELIED : It was further observed that the circumstances of the case revealed an implied agreement under which cheques were accepted unconditionally as payment.

PRE_RELIED : Even if the cheques, according to this Court, were taken conditionally the cheques having been not dishonoured, the payment related back to the dates of the receipt of the cheques and in law the dates of payment were the dates of the delivery of the cheques.

PRE_RELIED : Income, profits and gains in respect of the sales made to the Government of India were accordingly held to have been received by the assessee in British India.

PRE_RELIED : Dealing with the question of the understanding between the parties in that case, this Court observed: "According to the course of business usage in general to which, as part of the surrounding circumstances, attention has to be paid, under the authorities cited above, the parties must have intended that the cheques should be sent by post which is the usual and normal agency for transmission of such articles and according to the Tribunal's findings they were in fact received by the assessee by post."

PRE_RELIED : A similar argument was advanced on behalf of the assessee company in the case of Shri Jagdish Mills Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax(1) and it was held that the absence of such an express request would not make material difference if the course of dealings between the parties showed an implied request by the assessee company to send the cheques by post.

PRE_RELIED : In Jagdish Mills' case the assessee company was incorporated in Baroda State outside British India.

PRE_RELIED : The company accepted orders for the supply of goods F.O.R. Baroda to the Government of India.

PRE_RELIED : The manufacture and delivery of goods took place at Baroda.

PRE_RELIED : The company after effecting delivery of the goods submitted bills in the prescribed form which contained the sentence that "Government should pay the amount due to the company by cheque."

PRE_RELIED : There was, however, nothing in the bills to show in what way the payment by cheque was to be made.

PRE_RELIED : 
The company thereafter received at Baroda, in payment of its bills, cheques through post from the Government drawn on a Government Treasury or on a branch of the Reserve Bank of India or the Imperial Bank of India transacting Government business.

PRE_RELIED : The company endorsed the cheques and sent them either to Bombay or Ahmedabad in its banking account at such places.

PRE_RELIED : It was held that according to the course of business usage in general which was followed in the case, the parties must have intended that the cheques should be sent by post which was the usual and normal agency for transmission of such articles.

PRE_RELIED : An implied request by the company to send the cheques by post from Delhi was accordingly inferred.

PRE_RELIED : The post office was held to have become the agent of the assessee for the purpose of receiving those payments.

PRE_RELIED : This Court consequently came to the conclusion that the amounts of cheques were received by the assessee in British India and as such were liable to be taxed under section 4(1) (a) of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : The facts of the case of Indore Malwa United Mills Ltd.
v. Commissioner of Income-tax (supra) were similar to those of the present case.

PRE_RELIED : In that case the assessee, a non- resident, carried on the business of manufacturing textile goods at Indore, outside British India.

PRE_RELIED : The assessee supplied textile goods to the Stores Department of the Government of India under orders placed by the latter with the assessee at Indore.

PRE_RELIED : The delivery of the goods was F.O.R.
Indore.

PRE_RELIED : The bills contained the following instruction for payment: "Please pay by cheque to self on a bank at Indore."

PRE_RELIED : The Government of India drew cheques in favour of the assessee for the amounts of the bills on the Reserve Bank of India, Bombay and sent them by post to the assessee at Indore.

PRE_RELIED : The assessee deposited the cheques in its account with the Imperial Bank of India, Indore and on clearance, the amounts were credited to that account.

PRE_RELIED : Question which arose for decision was whether the assessee company was liable to pay tax in the taxable territories on the ground that the sale proceeds, which included the profit element therein, were received in the taxable territories.

PRE_RELIED : It was held that if by an agreement, express or implied, between the creditor and the debtor orby request, express or implied, by the creditor, the debtor is authorised to pay the debt by a cheque, and to send the cheque to the creditor by post, the post office becomes the agent of the creditor to receive the cheque and the creditor receives payment as soon as the cheque is posted to him.

PRE_RELIED : It was also held that there was an implied agreement between the parties that the Government of India would send the cheque by post to the assessee.

PRE_RELIED : The sale proceeds which included the profit element therein were, in the opinion of this Court, received in British India where the cheques were posted, and the profits in respect of the sales were taxable under section 4(1) (a) of the Act.


Id : 4252
PRE_RELIED : In the case of Issardas Daulat Ram & Ors. v. The Union of India & Ors.(2) this Court, after discussing the admitted circumstances of the case, found that the relevant pieces of evidence would prove the guilty knowledge of the accused.

PRE_RELIED : 
That was a case which arose under s. 178 (A) of the Sea Customs Act and this Court observed as follows :- "If the gold now in question had been imported earlier it would be extremely improbable that the gold would remain in the same shape of bars and with the same fineness         as when imported after the passage of this length of time.

PRE_RELIED : It was precisely for this reason that at the stage of the enquiry before the Collector the principal point which was urged on behalf of the appellants was to deny that the seized gold was of foreign origin and it is the nature of the defence that accounts for the order of the Collector dealing almost wholly with the consideration of that question.

PRE_RELIED : In order to reach his finding about the gold being smuggled, the Collector has referred to the conduct of the appellants ......

PRE_RELIED : 
         These were undoubtedly relevant pieces of evidence which bore on the question regarding the character of the gold, whether it was licit or illicit.

PRE_RELIED : Learned counsel is, therefore, not right in his submission regarding the absence of material before the Collector to justify the finding recorded in paragraph 6 we have set out earlier."

PRE_RELIED : In The State of Punjab v. Gian Chand & Ors. (Criminal Appeal No. 195 of 1962 disposed of on 2-4-1968), while examining the validity of conviction and sentence under s.
167(81) of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, this Court held that as the accused did not claim any ownership over the gold and was a bullion merchant, the mere fact that the gold had foreign markings would not be sufficient to prove that the accused had knowledge that the gold was smuggled.

PRE_RELIED : In this connection, this Court observed as follows :- "In our view, the High Court was right in its conclusion because the fact that none of the respondents claimed ownership over the said gold could not necessarily mean either that the gold was smuggled gold or that the respondents were         in possession thereof with the knowledge that it was so.

PRE_RELIED : The fact that the gold has foreign marks stamped on it can only mean that the gold was foreign.

PRE_RELIED : But since such foreign gold used to be imported before the present restrictions were imposed on its importation, it could have been imported without any violation of law.

PRE_RELIED : Consequently, that fact alone would not establish either of the two ingredients of s. 167(81)."

PRE_RELIED : In a later decision of this Court in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras v. Messrs Best & Co.(1) this Court observed as follows |- "When sufficient evidence, either direct or circumstantial, in respect of its contention was disclosed by the Revenue, adverse inference could be drawn against the assessee if he failed to put before the Department material which was in his exclusive possession.

PRE_RELIED : The process is described in the law of evidence as shifting of the onus in the course of a proceeding from one party to the other."

PRE_RELIED : In the case of Collector of Customs, Madras & Ors. v.
D.Bhoormull(2) a case under the Customs Act, while dwelling on the nature and purport of the onus which lay on the prosecution, this Court observed as follows:- "It cannot be disputed that in proceeding for imposing penalties under clause (8) of s. 167 to which s. 178-A does not apply, the burden of proving that the goods are smuggled goods, is on the Department.

PRE_RELIED : This is a fundamental         rule relating to proof in all criminal or quasi- criminal proceedings, where there is no statutory provision to the contrary.

PRE_RELIED : But in appreciating its scope and the nature of the onus cost by it, we must pay due regard to other kindred principles, no less fundamental, of universal application.

PRE_RELIED : One of them is that the prosecution or the Department is not required to prove its case with mathematical precision to a demonstrable degree........

PRE_RELIED : -All that it requires is the establishment of such a degree of probability that a prudent man may, on its basis, believe in the existence of the fact in issue,

PRE_RELIED : Thus, legal proof is not necessarily perfect proof, often it is nothing more than a prudent man's estimate as to the probabilities of the case."

PRE_RELIED : 
Similarly, while dealing with the merits of the case, this Court made the following observations :- "In the case before us, the circumstantial evidence suggesting the inference that the goods were illicitly imported into India, was similar and reasonably pointed towards the conclusion drawn by the Collector..........

PRE_RELIED : The Collector had given the fullest opportunity to Bhoormull to establish the alleged acquisition of the goods in the normal course of business.

PRE_RELIED : In doing so, he was not throwing the burden of proving what the Department had to establish, on Bhoormull.

PRE_RELIED : He was simply giving him a fair opportunity of rebutting the first and the foremost presumption that arose out of the tell-tale circumstances in which the goods were found, regarding their being smuggled goods by disclosing facts within his special knowledge."

PRE_RELIED : In the case of Labchand Dhanpat Singh Jain v. The State of Maharashtra, while this Court was again considering the extent and application of ss. 106 and 114 of the Evidence Act and in this connection, observed as follows:- "Even if we were to apply the ratio decidendi of Gian Chand's case (supra) in the case before us, we find that the         result would only be that no presumption under section 123 of the Act could be used against the appellant.

PRE_RELIED : We do not think that the High Court or the Magistrate had used this presumption.

PRE_RELIED : We find that they had relied upon circumstantial evidence in the case to infer the character of the gold recovered and the accused's guilty knowledge..........

PRE_RELIED : Furthermore, the case of Balumal Jamnadas Batra v. State of Maharashtra(1) was also a case under the Customs Act and there also the presumption under section 123 was not applicable.

PRE_RELIED : It was held therein that having regard to the conduct of the accused and nature of the articles mens rea was established.

PRE_RELIED : In this connection, this Court observed as follows :- "The very appearance of the goods and the manner in which they were packed indicated that they were newly manufactured and brought into this country very recently from another country.

PRE_RELIED : The inscriptions on them and writing on the boxes were parts of the state in which the goods in unopened boxes were found from which inferences about their origin and recent import could arise.

PRE_RELIED : The appellant's conduct, including his untruthful denial of their possession, indicated consciousness of their smuggled character or mens rea."


Id : 4239

Id : 4284

Id : 4202
PRE_RELIED : It was held by the Bombay High Court that section 11 of the Income Tax Act makes provision in respect of Vs.
                                         

PRE_RELIED : Mangalore Urban Development Authority 8/13 computation of income of the Trust from the properly held for charitable or religious purposes and it also provides for application and accumulation of income.

PRE_RELIED : 
 4. With regard to carrying forward of the losses for being set off against the income of the charitable trust for the present Assessment Year, the controversy is covered by the judgment in Vs.
                                                          Mangalore Urban Development Authority 11/13 Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemptions) and another Vs. Ohio University Christ College rendered on 17.07.2018 in ITA.No.312/2016 and ITA No.313/2016, in which this Court held as under: xxxxxxx.....
 18.

PRE_RELIED : A similar view was also taken by the Division Bench of Bombay High Court in Commissioner of Income- tax v. Institute of Banking (2003) 264 ITR 110, wherein the Division Bench of Bombay High Court held that the income derived from the trust property has also got to be computed on commercial Vs.
                                                                     Mangalore Urban Development Authority 12/13 principles and if commercial principles are applied, then adjustment of expenses incurred by the trust for charitable and religious purposes in the earlier years against the income earned by the trust in the subsequent year will have to be regarded as application of income of the trust for charitable and religious purposes in the subsequent year.


Id : 4086

Id : 4188
PRE_RELIED : The controversy involved herein is no more res integra in view of the decision of this Court in I.T.A.
Nos.536/2015 c/w 537/2015 dated 25.06.2018 (Prl.
Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr. v- M/s Softbrands India Pvt. Ltd.,) wherein it has been observed that unless the finding of the Tribunal is found ex facie perverse, the Appeal u/s. 260-A of the Act, is not maintainable.

PRE_RELIED : The relevant portion of the Judgment is quoted below for ready reference: "Conclusion: 55.  A substantial quantum of international trade and transactions depends upon the fair and quick judicial dispensation in such cases.

PRE_RELIED : Had it been a case of substantial question of interpretation of provisions of Double Taxation Avoidance Treaties (DTAA), interpretation of provisions of the Income Tax Act or Overriding Effect of the Treaties over the Domestic Legislations or the questions like Treaty Shopping, Base Erosion M/s Electronics for Imaging India Pvt. Ltd.
 10/12 and Profit Shifting (BEPS), Transfer of Shares in Tax Havens (like in the case of Vodafone etc.), if based on relevant facts, such substantial questions of law could be raised before the High Court under Section 260-A of the Act, the Courts could have embarked upon such exercise of framing and answering such substantial question of law.
On the other hand, the appeals of the present tenor as to whether the comparables have been rightly picked up or not, Filters for arriving at the correct list of comparables have been rightly applied or not, do not in our considered opinion, give rise to any substantial question of law.
 56.

PRE_RELIED : We are therefore of the considered opinion that the present appeals filed by the Revenue do not give rise to any substantial question of law and the suggested substantial questions of law do not meet the requirements of Section 260-A of the Act and thus the appeals filed by the Revenue are found to be devoid of merit and the same are liable to be dismissed.

PRE_RELIED : 
 M/s Electronics for Imaging India Pvt. Ltd.
 11/12 57.

PRE_RELIED : We make it clear that the same yardsticks and parameters will have to be applied, even if such appeals are filed by the Assessees, because, there may be cases where the Tribunal giving its own reasons and findings has found certain comparables to be good comparables to arrive at an `Arm's Length Price' in the case of the assessees with which the assessees may not be satisfied and have filed such appeals before this Court.

PRE_RELIED : Therefore we clarify that mere dissatisfaction with the findings of facts arrived at by the learned Tribunal is not at all a sufficient reason to invoke Section 260-A of the Act before this Court.

PRE_RELIED : 
 58. The appeals filed by the Revenue are therefore dismissed with no order as to costs."


Id : 4210

Id : 4093
PRE_RELIED : What we have held above is duly supported by the division bench judgment of Kerala High Court.

PRE_RELIED : It was a case in which the assessee before the court was Kerala State Electricity Board, a statutory corporation constituted under Section 5 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948.

PRE_RELIED : The revenue sought to cover the said Electricity Board under the provisions of Section 115JB which the assessee opposed.

PRE_RELIED : The issue reached the Kerala High Court.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The Court referred to and relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in case of B.C. Shrinivasa Setty (supra).

PRE_RELIED : It was noticed that the Board was required to keep and maintain its account in the manner specified by the Central Government and not in the manner specified in the Companies Act.

PRE_RELIED : In that view of the matter it was held that section 115JB would not apply to the Electricity Board.


Id : 4155
PRE_RELIED : 
A similar view was again expressed in two other cases, viz., Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Income-tax (2) and Kanhaiyalal Lohia v. The Commissioner of Income-tax (3).

PRE_RELIED : In Rajputana Textiles v. Commissioner of Income-tax (2), the converse conclusion was reached.

PRE_RELIED : There, on the facts and circumstances of the case, it was held that a particular deal in shares was a commercial venture and had all the attributes of an adventure in the nature of trade.


Id : 4122

Id : 4150

Id : 4096
PRE_RELIED : 
 It is to be seen that the Supreme Court, while dealing with a prayer for anticipatory bail , in Gurubaksh Singh, supra, has held as follows:- "In regard to anticipatory bail, if the proposed accusation appears to stem not from motives of furthering the ends of justice but from some ulterior motive, the object being to injure and humiliate the applicant by having him arrested, a direction for the release of the applicant on bail in the event of his arrest would generally be made.
               

PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, if it appears likely, considering the antecedents of the applicant, that taking advantage of the order of anticipatory bail he will flee from justice, such an order would not be made.

PRE_RELIED : But the converse of these propositions is not necessarily true.

PRE_RELIED : That is to say, it cannot be laid down as an inexorable rule that anticipatory bail cannot be granted unless the proposed accusation appears to be actuated by mala fides; and, equally, that anticipatory bail must be granted if there is no fear that the applicant will abscond.

PRE_RELIED : There are several other considerations, too numerous to enumerate, the combined effect of which must weigh with the court while granting or rejecting anticipatory bail.

PRE_RELIED : The nature and seriousness of the proposed charges, the context of the events likely to lead to the making of the charges, a reasonable possibility of the applicant's presence not being secured at the trial, reasonable apprehension that witnesses will be tampered with and "the larger interests of the public or the State" are some of the considerations which the court has to keep in mind while deciding an application for anticipatory bail."
 

PRE_RELIED : And the Calcutta High Court has held as follows in identical circumstances as arising in the case on hand:- "Considering the provisions laid down in S. 438 of the Code and the principles of law with regard to anticipatory bail explained by their Lordship in Gurubaksh Singh's case (1982 Cr. L. J., 1125) (S.C.) and also considering the view taken by atleast three Division Benches to the case referred to above

PRE_RELIED : , we are of the opinion that this Court has jurisdiction to entertain application for anticipatory bail of a petitioner who resides within the jurisdiction of the Court, though he apprehends arrest in connection with a case which has been started outside the jurisdiction of this Court".
 


Id : 4132

Id : 4130
PRE_RELIED : 
 8]  It is worth to mention that the Honourable Apex Court in the case of Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Schindia AIR 1988 SC 709 above categorically elucidated in paragraph No. 7 as under: "7.

PRE_RELIED : The legal position is wellsettled that when a prosecution at the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by the court is as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made prima facie establish the offence.

PRE_RELIED : It is also for the court to take into consideration any special features which appear in a particular case to consider whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit a prosecution to continue.

PRE_RELIED : This is so on the basis that the court cannot be utilised for any oblique purpose and where in the opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be served by allowing a criminal prosecution to continue, the court may while taking into consideration the special facts of a case also quash the proceeding even though it may be at a preliminary stage."
 9]       The Honourable Apex Court in the case of State of Haryana and others Vs. Ch. Bhajan Lal and others reported in MANU/SC/0115/1992 : 1991(1) RCR(Cri), 383 (SC)

PRE_RELIED : held that "where the proceedings is instituted with an ulterior motive or were the allegations made in the complaint are absurd and improbable, the Court would be within its power to quash the complaint/FIR".

PRE_RELIED : 
 Moreover, if the allegations in the FIR against the applicants are taken at their face value and accepted the same in its entirety would not constitute any offence or make out case against applicants, in such circumstances, there would not be any propriety to allow the prosecution to proceed further into the matter.


Id : 4240

Id : 4279
PRE_RELIED : The guidelines issued in Govind @ Bhai Ganesh Tilve (supra) read as under : "a) There shall be a Screening Committee in every District and in every Commissionerate area.

PRE_RELIED : In the District the Screening Committee shall consist of the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police.

PRE_RELIED : In the Commissionerate area it shall consist of the Commissioner of Police and Joint/Additional Commissioner of Police (Admn.)

PRE_RELIED : b) The Screening Committee shall commence the work of screening from the day of declaration of dates of election by the Election Commission.

PRE_RELIED : 
 c) Cases of all the license holders as laid down by the Election Commission in its directive shall be placed before the Screening Committee.

PRE_RELIED : The categories are : i) Persons released on bail.
 ii) Persons having a history of criminal offences; and iii)Persons involved in rioting at any time but especially during the election period.

PRE_RELIED : The Screening Committee shall bear in mind that the above categories are only illustrative and not exhaustive.

PRE_RELIED : 
 d) The Screening committee shall complete the exercise of screening in respect of licences placed before it as far as possible before the 1st date of filing of nominations.

PRE_RELIED : 
 e) On receipt of report from the Screening Committee, the licensing authority shall issue notice before the last date fixed for withdrawal of candidature to the individual licence holder for depositing his arms and inform the licence holder that failure to deposit the arms as directed would result in prosecution under Section 188 of the I.P.C. as stated in clause (h).
 f)

PRE_RELIED : The licence holder thereafter shall deposit his arms forthwith and in any case within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of the notice.

PRE_RELIED : The licensing Authority shall give proper receipt to the license holder.

PRE_RELIED : 
 g) The decision taken by the Screening Committee shall be final.

PRE_RELIED : 
 h) Any licence holder who fails to deposit arms within the period specified above shall be liable for prosecution under section 188 of Indian Penal Code.

PRE_RELIED : 
 i) All the arms so deposited with the administration be returned to the licence holder within a period of one week                 after declaration of election results.

PRE_RELIED : 
 j) The above timeframe should be adhered to as far as possible.


Id : 4159
PRE_RELIED : In so far as the first part of the question is concerned, whether the liability to pay sales tax of Rs.3,22,482/- being refund of sales tax received by the assessee during the relevant year was chargeable to tax, learned counsel for the parties are agreed that in view of the decision in Polyflex (India) Pvt. Limited v. Commissioner of Income Tax [2002] 257 ITR 343 (SC) this part of the question is required to be answered in the affirmative, that is in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The Allahabad High Court in J.K. Synthetics Limited v. O.S. Bajpai, ITO, Central Circle-V, Kanpur [1976] 105 ITR 864 has held that an assessee is entitled to claim deduction in respect of the liability of excise duty for which it had made a provision in its account books.

PRE_RELIED : This view was upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India v. J.K. Synthetics Limited [1993] 199 ITR 14.

PRE_RELIED : The Supreme Court held that since under Section 41 of the Act the liability to tax would depend on the outcome of the appeal, there would be no prejudice to the department if the provision is made and the assessment is made on that basis.


Id : 4073
PRE_RELIED : 10. This Court in Muralidhar @ Gidda & Anr. v.
 State of Karnataka3 referred to several earlier judgments        dealing with appeals against acquittals and observed that the appellate court must bear in mind the following : "12. .. ..
       (i) There is presumption of innocence in favour of an accused person and such 2 (1952) 3 SCR 193 3 (2014) 5 SCC 730  12 (i-iv) presumption is strengthened by the order of acquittal passed in his favour by the trial court; (ii) The accused person is entitled to the benefit of reasonable doubt when it deals with the merit of the appeal against acquittal; (iii) Though, the powers of the appellate court in considering the appeals against acquittal are as extensive as its powers in appeals against convictions but the appellate court is generally loath in disturbing the finding of fact recorded by the trial court.

PRE_RELIED : It is so because the trial court had an advantage of seeing the demeanour of the witnesses.

PRE_RELIED : If the trial court takes a reasonable view of the facts of the case, interference by the appellate court with the judgment of acquittal is not justified.

PRE_RELIED : Unless, the conclusions reached by the trial court are palpably wrong or based on erroneous view of the law or if such conclusions are allowed to stand, they are likely to result in grave injustice, the reluctance on the part of the appellate court in interfering with such conclusions is fully justified; and (iv) Merely because the appellate court on reappreciation and re-evaluation of the evidence is inclined to take a different view, interference with the judgment of acquittal is not justified if the view taken by the trial court is a possible view.

PRE_RELIED : The evenly balanced views of the evidence must not result in the interference by the appellate court in the judgment of the trial court."
 11.

PRE_RELIED : It is relevant to refer to another judgment of this Court in Ghurey Lal v. State of Uttar Pradesh4 in which the principles to be followed by the appellate courts to overrule or otherwise disturb the trial court's acquittal were crystallised as under: "70. ...
   1.

PRE_RELIED : The appellate court may only overrule or otherwise disturb the trial court's acquittal if it has "very substantial and compelling reasons" for doing so.

PRE_RELIED : 
 A number of instances arise in which the appellate court would have "very substantial and compelling reasons" to discard the trial court's decision.

PRE_RELIED : "Very substantial and compelling reasons" exist when: (i) The trial court's conclusion with regard to the facts is palpably wrong; 4 (2008) 10 SCC 450 (ii) The trial court's decision was based on an erroneous view of law; (iii) The trial court's judgment is likely to result in "grave miscarriage of justice"; (iv) The entire approach of the trial court in dealing with the evidence was patently illegal; (v) The trial court's judgment was manifestly unjust and unreasonable; (vi) The trial court has ignored the evidence or misread the material evidence or has ignored material documents like dying declarations/report of the ballistic expert, etc.
   

PRE_RELIED : (vii) This list is intended to be illustrative, not exhaustive.

PRE_RELIED : 2. The appellate court must always give proper weight and consideration to the findings of the trial court.

PRE_RELIED : 
   3. If two reasonable views can be reached--one that leads to acquittal, the other to conviction--the High Courts/appellate courts must rule in favour of the accused."


Id : 4146
PRE_RELIED : 
In the case of M/s. Thimmasamudram Tobacco Co. v. Assistant Collector of Central Excise, Nellore Dt. Nellore(2) while construing the provisions of the Central Excise and Salt Act which was almost on identical terms as the Customs Act a Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court observed as follows : "Assuming that section 35 of the Central Excise Act does not clothe the appellate authority with power to remand the matter to the officer whose orders is appealed against nothing stands in the way of the Assistant Collector initiating the proceedings afresh, when his order was quashed not on merits but on technical grounds, i.e. for not following either the procedure or the dictates of natural justice.

PRE_RELIED : In a case where the flaw in the order appealed against consists of in the non-observance of certain procedure or in not giving effect to the maxim 'audi alteram partem', it is open to the officer concerned to start the procedure once against with a view to follow the rules of procedure and the principles of natural justice".


Id : 4260

Id : 4069
PRE_RELIED : 
 3. After hearing the learned counsel appearing for the appellant-Revenue, we find that, the issues which arise for consideration in the present appeal are already covered by the decision of this Court dated 21.6.2016 in ITA No.604/2015 and other matters in case of The Commissioner of Income Tax and others Vs. The National Co-operative Bank Limited.

PRE_RELIED : In the above referred decision, this Court observed thus: "In all matters, the appellant-Revenue has preferred the appeals by raising following substantial questions of law: "1. Whether the Tribunal is right in law in relying on Circular No.9/2002 when the same has been quashed by the Hon. Mumbai High Court in the case of Jalgaon District Central Co-Operative Bank Ltd.,?
 2. Whether the Tribunal was correct in holding that Co-Operative Bank are not liable to deduct tax on the interest paid to its members on the ground that they are exempt U/s 194A(3)(v) of the IT Act 1961?
 3.

PRE_RELIED : Whether the Tribunal is right in law in overlooking the established principle of `generalia specialibus non derogant' vis--vis the specific provisions of Sec.194A(3)(viia)(b) and general provisions of 194A(3)(v) of the Act?
 4.

PRE_RELIED : Whether the Tribunal was correct in not appreciating the fact that the provision of Section 194A(3)(v) is a general provision granting benefit to all co-operative societies, whereas, the provisions of Section 194A(3)(i)(b) deals with co-operative society carrying on the business of banking, hence specific provisions in any case overrides the general provisions?"
 2.

PRE_RELIED : We are also of the view that the decision of the Hon'ble Kerala High Court in the case of Moolamattom Electricity Board Employees Co-op Bank Ltd(supra) supports the plea of the Assessee before us.

PRE_RELIED : 20. The learned counsel for the Assessee as brought to our notice that the ITAT Vishakapatnam Bench in the case of The Vishakapatnam Co-operative Bank ITA No.5 and 19 of 2011 order dated: 29.08.2011 as held that co-operative societies carrying on banking business when it pays interest to its members on deposits it need not deduct tax at source in view of the provisions of Sec.194A(3)(v) of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : Similar view has also been expressed by the Pune Bench of the ITAT in the case of Ozer Merchant Co- operative Bank ITA No.1588/PN/2012 order dated 30.10.2013.


Id : 4185
PRE_RELIED : 
As regards the first contention, the question is now concluded by the decision of this Court in The State of Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley & Co. (Madras) Ltd. (1) in which it has been held that the expression " sale of goods " in Entry 48 has the same meaning which it has in the Indian Sale of Goods Act, 1930, that in a building contract there is no sale of materials as such, and that it is therefore ultra vires the powers of the Provincial Legislature to impose tax on the supply of materials.

PRE_RELIED : 
In Powell v. Appollo Candle Company Limited the question arose as to whether s. 133 of the Customs Regulation Act of 1879 of New South Wales which conferred a power on the Governor to impose tax on certain articles of import was an unconstitutional delegation of legislative powers.

PRE_RELIED : In holding that it was not, the Privy Council observed: "It is argued that the tax in question has been (1) [1951] S.C.R. 747, 787, 982, 984- (3) (1885) 10 A.C. 282.
(2) [1955] 1 S.C.R. 290.imposed by the Governor and not by the Legislature who alone had power to impose it.

PRE_RELIED : But the duties levied under the Order-in-Council are really levied by the authority of the Act under which the Order is issued.

PRE_RELIED : The Legislature has not parted with its perfect control over the Governor, and has the power, of course, at any moment, of withdrawing or altering the power which they have entrusted to him.

PRE_RELIED : In these circumstances, their Lordships are of opinion that the judgment of the Supreme Court was wrong in declaring Section 133 of the Customs Regulation Act of 1879 to be beyond the power of the Legislature."

PRE_RELIED : 
In Syed Mohamed & Co. v. The State of Madras (1), the question was as to the vires of rules 4 and 16 framed under the Madras General Sales Tax Act.

PRE_RELIED : Section 5 (vi) of that Act had left it to the rule-making authority to determine at which single point in the series of sales by successive dealers the tax should be levied, and pursuant thereto, rules 4 and 16 had provided that it was the purchaser who was liable to pay the tax in respect of sales of hides and skins.

PRE_RELIED : The validity of the rules was attacked on the ground that it was only the legislature that "as competent to decide who shall be taxed, and that the determination of that question by the rule-making authorities was ultra vires.

PRE_RELIED : The Madras High Court rejected this conntetion, and held on a review of the authorities that the delegation of authority under s. 5 (vi) war, within permissible constitutional limits.

PRE_RELIED : 
In Hampton J. R. & Co. v. United States (2), which was cited on behalf of the appellant, the question arose whether s.
315(b) of the Tariff Act, 1922, under which the President had been empowered to make such increases and decreases in the rates of duty as were found necessary for carrying out the policies declared in the statute was an unconstitutional delegation, and the decision was that such delegation was not unconstitutional.


Id : 4199

Id : 4106

Id : 4113

Id : 4098

Id : 4241

Id : 4116

Id : 4283
PRE_RELIED : 
 7. In the case of Ishar Das, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that It is Manifest from plain reading of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Act that it makes no distinction between persons of the age of more than 21 years and those of the age of less than 21 years.

PRE_RELIED : 
 10. In the decision of the co-ordinate bench of this Court in the case of Ravindra Sahadev Ghode in Crl.A.No.2513/2011 the Court held that " on considering the question of releasing the appellant therein under the Probation of Offenders Act, the Court held that "I find that observations exercised by the trial Court is proper but there is procedural lapse.

PRE_RELIED : I find that the learned Judge has committed an irregularity.

PRE_RELIED : It is not pointed out by the prosecution that there is any occasion of failure of justice" and further it held that "I find that it not just proper to set aside the order of trial Court though it is procedurally erroneous in law if not against the facts."

PRE_RELIED : On careful perusal of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Ratan Lal Arora stated supra, the Hon'ble Apex Court while dealing with the applicability of provisions of Probation of Offenders Act and Section 360 of Cr.P.C. has held at para 12 of the judgment which is extracted below: "12. That apart Section 7 as well as Section 13 of the Act provide for a minimum sentence of six months and one year respectively in addition to the maximum sentences as well as imposition of fine.

PRE_RELIED : Section 28 further stipulates that the provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.

PRE_RELIED : In the case of Superintendent Central Excise, Bangalore vs Bahubali, (AIR 1979 SC 1271), while dealing with Rule 126-P (2) (ii) of the Defence of India Rules which prescribed a minimum sentence and Section 43 of the Defence of India Act, 1962 almost similar to the purport enshrined in Section 28 of the Act in the context of a claim for granting relief under the Probation Act, this Court observed that in cases where a specific enactment, enacted after the Probation Act prescribes a minimum sentence of imprisonment, the provisions of Probation Act cannot be invoked if the special Act contains any provision to enforce the same without reference to any other Act containing a provision, in derogation of the special enactment, there is no scope for extending the benefit of the Probation Act to the accused.

PRE_RELIED : Unlike, the provisions contained in Section 5(2) proviso of the Old Act providing for imposition of a sentence lesser than the minimum sentence of one year therein for any "special reasons" to be recorded in writing, the Act did not carry any such power to enable the Court concerned to show any leniency below the minimum sentence stipulated.

PRE_RELIED : Consequently, the learned Single Judge in the High Court committed a grave error of law in extending the benefit of probation even under the Code.

PRE_RELIED : At the same time we may observe that though the reasons assigned by the High Court to extend the benefits of probation may not be relevant, proper or special reasons for going below the minimum sentence prescribed - which in any event is wholly impermissible, as held supra, we take them into account to confine the sentence of imprisonment to the minimum of six months under Section 7 and minimum of one year under Section 13(2) of the Act, both the sentences to run concurrently.

PRE_RELIED : So far as the levy of fine in addition made by the learned Trial Judge with a default clause on two separate courts are concerned, they shall remain unaffected and are hereby confirmed.
         The appeal shall stand allowed."

PRE_RELIED : 
 19. In the case of Mohd. Hashim stated supra, the Hon'ble Apex Court again considered the issue with regard to release of accused under Probation of Offenders Act.

PRE_RELIED : The issue before the Hon'ble Apex Court was whether the approach of the learned Sessions Judge and concurred by the High Court was legally sustainable in the said case, the offence related to 498A of IPC and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act,1961.
 20.

PRE_RELIED : The Hon'ble Apex Court while dealing with the said case and relying on the judgment of Ratan Lal Arora case, held that "We may further elaborate that when the legislature has prescribed minimum sentence without discretion, the same cannot be reduced by the Courts."

PRE_RELIED : In such cases imposition of minimum sentence be imprisonment or fine is mandatory and leaves no discretion to the Court however, sometimes, the legislature prescribes a minimum sentence and grants discretion and Courts for reasons to be recorded in writing may award lesser sentence or not award a sentence of imprisonment such discretion includes the discretion not to send the accused to prison.

PRE_RELIED : Minimum sentence means a sentence which must be imposed without leaving any discretion to the Court not to award minimum sentence cannot be equated with provisions which prescribe a minimum sentence.

PRE_RELIED : 
The two provisions therefore are not identical and have different implications which should be recognized and accepted in the probation of offenders Act.

PRE_RELIED : Thereafter, finally, the Hon'ble Apex Court held that "we have made it clear that there is no minimum sentence and hence, the provisions of Probation of Offenders Act would apply.

PRE_RELIED : We have also opined that the Court has to be guided by the provision of Probation of Offenders Act and the precedents of this Court."

PRE_RELIED : 
 21. The similar view was taken thereafter in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Vikram Das stated supra wherein the Apex Court relying on the earlier two judgments stated herein held at para 8 that " In view of aforesaid judgments that where minimum sentence is provided, the Court cannot impose less than the minimum sentence.

PRE_RELIED : It also held that provisions of Article 142 of the Constitution cannot be resorted to impose sentence less than the minimum sentence."

PRE_RELIED : Therefore the appeal before the Hon'ble Apex Court was allowed and the accused was directed to undergo sentence imposed by the trial Court for an offence under Section 3(1)(ii) of the SC/ST Prevention of Atrocities Act.


Id : 4231

Id : 4265

Id : 4258

Id : 4160
PRE_RELIED : 
 In view of the decision of this Court in the case of Cambay Electric Supply Industrial Co. Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Income-tax, Gujarat-II, 113 ITR 84, this question is no longer res integra.

PRE_RELIED : Dealing with a similar provision i.e.80 E of the Act prior to its amendment by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1967, this Court came to the conclusion that in computing the profits of the assessee for the purpose of the special deduction provided under Section 80 E, items of unabsorbed depreciation and unabsorbed development rebate, carried forward from earlier years, will have to be deducted before arriving at the figure from which the 8% contemplated by Section 80E is to be deducted.

PRE_RELIED : In support thereof, reliance was placed on the judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Commissioner of Income-tax, Patiala-I Vs. Patiala Flour Mills Co. P. Ltd., 127 ITR 301.


Id : 4134
PRE_RELIED : 
 18. A somewhat, similar situation arose in Kunwar Pal (Supra) wherein this Court held as under: "12.

PRE_RELIED : We find that the intention of the appellant to kill the deceased, if any, has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt and in any case the appellant is entitled to the benefit of doubt which is prominent in this case.

PRE_RELIED : It is not possible therefore to sustain the sentence under Section 304 Part I IPC, which requires that the act by which death is caused, must be done with the intention of causing death or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.

PRE_RELIED : Though it is not possible to attribute intention it is equally not possible to hold that the act was done without the knowledge that it is likely to cause death.

PRE_RELIED : Everybody, who carries a gun with live cartridges and even others know that firing a gun and that too in the presence of several people is an act, is likely to cause death, as indeed it did.

PRE_RELIED : Guns must be carried with a sense of responsibility and caution and are not meant to be used in such places like marriage ceremonies."


Id : 4084

Id : 13643
PRE_RELIED : 
 On the other hand, the decisions cited. by learned counsel for the respondents in Vadilal Panchaly.

PRE_RELIED : D.D. Gha- digaonkar(1) and Cen-tarS, Spinning & Manufacturing Co. v.
 State of Maharashtra(2) show that it is wrong to say that at the stage of flaming charges the court cannot apply.

PRE_RELIED : its judicial mind to the consideration whether or not there is any ground for presuming the commission of the offence by the accused.

PRE_RELIED : In Vadilal Panchal's case.

PRE_RELIED : (supra) section 203 of the old Code was under consideration, which provided that the Magistrate could dismiss a complaint if after considering certain matters mentioned in the section there was in his judgment no sufficient ground for proceeding with the case..

PRE_RELIED : To art extent section 227 of the new Code contains an analogous power which is conferred on the Sessions Court.

PRE_RELIED : It was held by this Court, while considering the true scope of s. 203 of the old Code that the Magistrate. was not bound to accept the result of an enquiry or investigation and that he must apply his judicial mind to the material on which he had to form his judgment


Id : 4105
PRE_RELIED : In a case law as it is reported in 2014 Supp(II) OLR 999 Hari Dehury versus- State of Orissa, Their Lordship held that evidentiary value of the extra judicial confession must be judged in the facts and circumstances of each individual case.

PRE_RELIED : If such extra judicial confession is voluntary and consistent with the circumstantial evidence then only the guilt of the accused can be established.

PRE_RELIED : In another case law as it is reported in 2009(I) OLR 548 State of Orissa-versus-Mulia Adapadia, Their Lordship held that unless the extra judicial confession is made voluntarily before a witness on whom the accused has trust and confidence, such statement should not be acted upon.

PRE_RELIED : In another case as it is reported in (2011) 49 OCR (SC) 712 Sk. Yusuf-versus- State of West Bengal, Their Lordship of the Hon'ble Apex Court held that extra judicial confession is certainly a weak piece of evidence, but if it is true and voluntary and made in a free state of mind, then it is credible one and conviction can be based on such extra judicial confession.

PRE_RELIED : Similarly, in another case as it is reported in (2012) 52 OCR SC 435 Sahadeb and another- vesus- State of Tamilnadu, Their Lordship of the Hon'ble Apex Court has formulated certain principles while considering the extra judicial confession of the accused.

PRE_RELIED : Those are:-

PRE_RELIED : (i) The extra judicial confession is weak evidence by itself.

PRE_RELIED : It has to be examined by the Court with great care and caution, (ii) It should be made voluntarily and should be truthful, (iii) It should inspires confidence, (iv) The extra judicial confession attains a great credibility and evidentiary value, if it is supported by a chain of cogent circumstances and is further corroborated by the prosecution evidence, (v) In an extra judicial confession to base any conviction, it should not be suffer from any material discrepancy and inherent improbability, (vi) Such statement essentially has to be proved like any other fact in accordance with law.
 

PRE_RELIED : In a case law as it is reported in (2009) 44 OCR 938 Khaga @ Khageswat Naik and others- versus- State of Orissa, wherein Their Lordship held that where the incident took place without any pre-plan but in a heat of passion then it falls u/s. 304, Part-II of IPC instead of section- 302 of IPC.

PRE_RELIED : In another case law as it is reported in (2009) 44 OCR 723 Adikanda Mohanty and another-versus- State of Orissa, Their Lordship held that while the assault was not made with a pre-plan, but the incident happened at the spur of the moment causing death of a person due to assault of the accused, then also it falls u/s. 304, Part-II of IPC, instead of u/s. 302 of IPC.

PRE_RELIED : In another case law as it is reported in (2005) 11 SCC 536 Tanka Chain versus- State, Their Lordship held that when there is no motive to cause death, section- 300 of IPC is not attracted, but if the assailant knew that the said injury is likely to cause the death, the conviction will be u/s. 304, Part-II of IPC.

PRE_RELIED : Similarly, in another case law as it is reported in (2000) 7 SCC 2249 State-versus- Indarjit, Their Lordship held that absence of intention to cause a death coupled with lack of knowledge that death would be inevitably caused on account of the injury would make an offence falls only u/s.304,Part-II of IPC, but not u/s. 302 of IPC.


Id : 4112

Id : 4219

Id : 4230

Id : 4263
PRE_RELIED : We accordingly passed order dated January 29, 2018 directing the petitioner to file an affidavit of her income which would be in the fomat as prescribed in the judgment of Delhi High Court in the case of Kusum Sharma v.
       Mahinder Kumar Sharma decided on January 14, 2015 (FAO No. 309/1996).


Id : 4217

Id : 4169

Id : 4262
PRE_RELIED : As observed by this Court in The United Commercial Bank Ltd., Calcutta v. The Commissioner of Income-tax, West Bengal(1) "the scheme of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, is that the various heads of income, profits and gains enumerated in s. 6 are mutually exclusive, each head being specific to cover the item) arising from a particular source and, consequently, "interest on securities" which is specifically made chargeable to tax under s. 8 as a distinct head, falls under that section and cannot be brought under s. 10, whether the securities are held as trading assets or capital asset."

PRE_RELIED : In The United Commercial Bank's case(1) the Income Tax Officer split up the income of a Banking Company was in the course of assessment, into two heads"interest on securities" and "business income", and set off the business loss against the income from securities in the year, of assessment, but did not allow the business loss of a previous year to be set off under s. 24(2) against that (1) [1959] S.C.R. 79.income.

PRE_RELIED : This view was approved by the High Court of Calcutta.

PRE_RELIED : The High Court held that the several heads under s. 6 of the income-tax Act are mutually exclusive, and an item falling under an exclusive head cannot be charged under another head.

PRE_RELIED : This view was affirmed by this Court, and it was held that "interest on securities" being specifically charged under s. 8, which is a distinct head, it could not be brought under s. 10, whether the securities were trading assets or capital assets.

PRE_RELIED : This is made clear in the judgment of this Court in the United Commercial Bank Ltd.'s ,case(1) that business income is broken up under different heads only for the purpose of computation of the total income: by that break-up the income does not cease to be the income of the business, the different heads of income being only the classification prescribed by the Indian Income-tax Act for computation of income.

PRE_RELIED : 
We may briefly refer to the decision of this Court in The Commissioner of Income-tax, Madras v. The Express Newspapers Limited, Madras(1).

PRE_RELIED : In that case Free Press Limited-a Private Company-transferred its business on August 31, 1946 to the assessee the Express Newspapers Ltd. and thereafter resolved to wind up its business voluntarily.

PRE_RELIED : An amount of Rs. 2,14,000/- was assessed in the relevant year of assessment as business profit of the transferor company taxable under s. 10(2) (vii) and Rs. 3,94,576/- taxable as capital gains.

PRE_RELIED : The business profit was held to be not taxable because it accrued in a winding up sale and not in a trading venture.

PRE_RELIED : Liability of the second amount to tax as capital gains was not canvassed, but it was contended by the Express Newspapers Ltd. that as successor to the Free Press Ltd., it was not liable to be assessed under s. 26(2).

PRE_RELIED : In examining the scheme of s. 12B it was observed:- "Under that section the tax shall be payable by the assessee under the head capital gains in respect of any profits or gains arising from the sale of a capital asset effected during the prescribed period.

PRE_RELIED : It says further that such profits or gains shall be deemed to be income of the previous year in which the sale etc. took place.

PRE_RELIED : This deeming clause does not lift the capital gains from the 6th head in s. 6 and place it (1)[1964] 8 S.C.R. 189                         under the 4th head.

PRE_RELIED : It only introduces a limited fiction, namely, that capital gains accrued will be deemed to be income of the previous year in which the sale was affected.

PRE_RELIED : 
                         The fiction does not make them the profit or gains of the business.

PRE_RELIED : It is well settled that a legal fiction is limited to the purpose for which it is created and should not be extended beyond its legitimate field.

PRE_RELIED : Sub- section (2A) and (2B) of s. 24 provide for the setting off of the loss falling under the head "capital gains" against any capital gains falling under the same head.

PRE_RELIED : Such loss cannot be set off against an income falling under any different head.

PRE_RELIED : These three sections indicate beyond any doubt that the capital gains are separately computed in accordance with the said provisions and they are not treated as the profits from the business.

PRE_RELIED : The profits and gains of business and capital gains are two distinct concepts in the Incometax Act: the former arises from the activity which is called business and the latter accrues because capital assets are disposed of at a value higher than what they cost to the assessee.
                         

PRE_RELIED : They are placed under "different heads; they are derived from different sources; and the income is computed under different methods.

PRE_RELIED : 
                         The fact that the capital gains are connected with the capital assets of the business cannot make them the profit of the business.

PRE_RELIED : They are only deemed to be income of the previous year and not the profit or gains arising from the business during that year."

PRE_RELIED : Dealing with s. 26(2) it was observed:- the expression "profits" in the proviso makes it clear that the income, profits and gains in sub-s. (2) of s. 26 only refer to the profits under the 4th head in s. 6.

PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, if the interpretation sought to be put upon the expression "income" in sub-s. (2) of                         s. 26 by the Revenue is accepted, then the absence of that word in the proviso destroys the argument.

PRE_RELIED : But the more reasonable view is that both the sub-section and the proviso deal only with the profits under the 4th head mentioned in s. 6 and, so construed, it excludes capital gains.

PRE_RELIED : The argument that sub-s. (2) of s. 26 read with the proviso thereto indicates that the total income of the person succeeded is the criterion for separate assessment under sub-s. (2) and for assessment and realisation under the proviso is on the assumption that sub-s. (2) and the proviso deal with all the heads mentioned in s. 6 of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : But if, as we have held, the scope of sub-s. (2) of s. 26 is only limited to the income from the business, the share under sub- s. (2) and the assessment and realisation under the proviso can only relate to the income from the business.

PRE_RELIED : The argument is really begging the question itself."


Id : 4261
PRE_RELIED : 
         It is pertinent to mention here the observations made by this Court in Pritam Singh v. The State, A.I.R. [1950] S.C. 169, which are as follows:- "It will not grant special leave to appeal under Article 136 (1) of the Constitution unless it is shown that exceptional and special circumstances exist, that substantial and grave injustice has been done and the case in question presents features of sufficient gravity to warrant a review of the decision appealed against and that only those points can be urged at the final hearing of A the appeal which are fit to be urged at the preliminary stage when leave is asked for.

PRE_RELIED : It is well established that this court does not by special leave convert itself into a court to review evidence of a third time.

PRE_RELIED : Where, however, the court below fails in apprehending the true effect of a material change in the versions given by the witnesses immediately after the occurrence and the narrative at the trial with respect to the nature and character of the offence, it seems to us that in such a situation it would not be right for this court to affirm such a decision when it occasions a failure of justice."
 

PRE_RELIED : This decision has been relied upon and followed in a subsequent decision of this Court in Sadhu Singh Harnan Singh v. State of Pepsu, A.I.R. [1954] S.C. 271.
 


Id : 4278
PRE_RELIED : The Hon'ble Supreme Court in S.R.M.B.Dairy Farming (P.) Ltd. (supra) held as under:- "Appeal to High Court  Monetary limits for litigation by Department  Circular to apply to pending appeals  but Circular not to be applied by court ipso facto when matter has cascading effect or where common principles involved in large number of matters Income Tax Act, 1961 ss. 260A, 268A  Instruction No.3 of 2011, dated 9-2-2011.
 The view adopted by the Delhi High Court making the circular applicable to pending matters came up before a three- Judges Bench of this Court in SLP (C) No.CC 13694 of 2011 titled CIT v. Surya Herbal Ltd. when the following order was passed on August 29, 2011: "Delay condoned.
 The Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
                                                                                                                     vs.
 M/s.

PRE_RELIED : Luwa India

PRE_RELIED : Pvt. Ltd.

PRE_RELIED : 
 5/22

PRE_RELIED : Liberty is given to the Department to move the High Court pointing out that the Circular dated February 9, 2011 should not be applied ipso facto, particularly, when the matter has a cascading effect.

PRE_RELIED : There are cases under the Income-tax Act, 1961 in which a common principle may be involved in subsequent group of matters or a large number of matters.

PRE_RELIED : In our view, in such cases if attention of the High Court is drawn, the High Court will not apply the circular ipso facto.

PRE_RELIED : For that purpose, liberty is granted to the Department to move the High Court in two weeks.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The Special Leave Petition is, accordingly, disposed of."

PRE_RELIED : 
 23. We have already given our imprimatur to the observations made by the Karnataka High Court in a detailed analysis in Ranka and Ranka case (supra), which was dealt with the litigation policy philosophy behind applying the circular and the benefit being extended in view thereof to all assesses where appeals have been pending, but below the financial limit, as otherwise an anomalous situation would arise.

PRE_RELIED :  24. We may also take note of the judgment of this court in Suchitra Components Ltd.
v. CCE on the general principle of application of circulars.

PRE_RELIED : Reliance was placed on the view expressed in CCE v. Mysore Electricals Industries Ltd. opining that a beneficial circular has to be applied retrospectively while an oppressive circular has to be applied prospectively.


Id : 4206
PRE_RELIED : 
 75. Referring to M.P.V.Sundararamier & Co.
Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (as His Lordship then was) speaking for six out of the seven Judges constituting the Bench in Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd.

PRE_RELIED : V. State of U.P. held that under the constitutional scheme of division of powers in the Seventh Schedule, there are separate entries pertaining to taxation and other laws.

PRE_RELIED : A tax cannot be levied under a general entry.


Id : 4075

Id : 4138
PRE_RELIED : As such, the law laid down by our Hon'ble High Court in the case of Dasapa Setty v/s Thammannagowda (report in A.I.R. 1994 Kar. 153) is aptly applicable to the case in hand.


Id : 4071
PRE_RELIED : 
In S. M. S. Karuppiah Pillai v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Madras(1), in dealing with the effect of s. 44 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, before it was amended by Act 7 of 1939, a Full Bench of the Madras High Court observed "This section (s.44) only applies when there has been discontinuance of the, business, The section (1) 911.T.R. I.                         says that if a business is discontinued the partners shall nevertheless be jointly and severally liable for the profits which had been earned".

PRE_RELIED : In Shivram Poddar v. Income-tax Officer, Central Circle II, Calcutta and Anr.(1) this Court examined the scheme of s. 44 (before it was amended by the Finance Act of 1958) and its inter-relation with the provisions of ss. 25(1), (2), 26(1), (2) and 28 (1) (c) in some detail.

PRE_RELIED : 
                         This scheme of assessment fumishes the reason for omitting reference to dissolution of a firm from section 44 when such dissolution is not accompanied by discontinuance of the business".
Two other cases decided by this Court may be briefly noticed.

PRE_RELIED : In C. A. Abraham v. Income-tax Officer, Kottayam and Another(1) there was discontinuance of the business of the firm consequent upon dissolution of the firm, s. 44 was held applicable, and it was held that imposition or penalty being a process of assessment the.

PRE_RELIED : Income-tax Officer was not incompetent to levy penalty after discontinuance of the business.

PRE_RELIED : In Commissioner of Income-tax, Madras and Another v. S. V. Angidi Chettiar (2) this Court held that the Income-tax Officer could exercise under s. 44 read with s.
28 power to impose penalty upon the firm which discontinued its business on dissolution caused by the death of one of the partners (1) 41 I.T.R. 425.
(2) 44 I. T. R 739.Section 44 therefore only applied to those cases in which there had been discontinuance of the business and not to case, in which the business continued after reconstitution of the firm or there was succession to the business.


Id : 4154
PRE_RELIED : The Apex Court in AIR, 1966 S.C.
 119" (Aghnoo Nagesia Vs. State of Bihar)

PRE_RELIED : has held that such admission of an incriminating fact including all other admission of related incriminating fact of the offence, fall within the purview of section 25 of Indian Evidence Act.

PRE_RELIED : The same is reiterated in 1972 Cr.L.J.
 626 ( Khatri Hemraj Amulakh Vs. The State of Gujrat).
 

PRE_RELIED : The Apex Court has observed in the same Judgment as follows.

PRE_RELIED : 
 "The part of the information as related distinctly to the fact discovered in consequence of the information could also be admitted into evidence under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, if the other conditions of that section were satisfied."
 

PRE_RELIED : 
 17.  The Apex Court in Raghavan Achari (Supra) acquitted the accused as that was the case of self defence, as the accused had caused grievous injuries to the appellant first and the appellant having seen the deceased in compromising position with his wife, and therefore, in this background the appellant had inflicted with the chopper, which resulted into the death of the deceased.


Id : 4175

Id : 4119

Id : 4181

Id : 4092
PRE_RELIED : In so far as the second question is concerned, the matter is now settled by the decision of this Court in B. C. Mitter & Sons v. Commissioner of Income-tax (1).

PRE_RELIED : The leading case in support of the respondents is the Madras decision reported in Jakka Devayya and Sons v. Commissioner of Income-tax (1), and that case alone needs to be considered, because all the reasons on which the cases on this side have proceeded are given there.

PRE_RELIED : They also observed that too rigid a construction need not be put upon the deed, and referred to Lindley on Partnership, 11th Edn., p. 87 and A. Khorasany v.
 C. Acha and Others (2).

PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, there is a decision of the Calcutta High Court reported in Hoosen Kassam Dada v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Bengal (3), in which Costello and Panckridge, JJ. have held

PRE_RELIED : that under s. 26A of the Income-tax Act and the Rules, the Income-tax Officer is only. empowered to register a partnership which is specified in the instrument of partnership and of which registration is asked for.

PRE_RELIED : In Hardutt Ray Gajadhar Ram v. Commissioner of Income-tax(4) Malik, C. J. and Seth, J. hold that where a minor is admitted as a full partner with equal rights and obligations with adults, the deed is invalid.

PRE_RELIED : 
 In Banka Mal Lajja Ram & Co. v. Commissioner of Income-tax (5), it is held that a minor cannot be a partner, and that the partnership which admits a minor as full partner cannot be registered.


Id : 4125
PRE_RELIED : This Court in a recent judgment-C. A. Abraham v. Income-tax Officer, Kottayam (1)-held that the Income-tax Officer had power under s. 28 of the Income-tax Act to impose penalty in the course of assessment of a firm even if the firm stood at the date of the order dissolved by the death of one of its partners.

PRE_RELIED : In so holding, this Court observed that s. 44 of the Income-tax Act sets up machinery for assessing tax liability of a firm which has discontinued its business and that the expression "assessment" in the different sections ofChapter IV of the Income-tax Act was not used merely in the sense of computation of income, and when s. 44 declared that the partners or members of the firm shall be jointly and severally liable to assessment, it referred to the liability to computation of income under s.23 as well as the application of the procedure for declaration and imposition of tax liability and the machinery for enforcement thereof.

PRE_RELIED : This Court in C. A. Abraham's case approved the decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Mareddy Krishna Reddy v. Income-tax Officer, Tenali, (1) which was a case of a registered firm, which was dissolved before imposition of penalty.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The Calcutta High Court in Khushiram Murarilal v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Central Calcutta (1) was called upon to deal with the submission made before us in this case.

PRE_RELIED : In that case the question which fell to be determined was whether imposition of a penalty on a registered firm under s. 28 (1) (b) of the Income Tax Act was justified in law.

PRE_RELIED : It was urged in that case on behalf of theassessee-a registered firm-that inasmuch as under, s. 28 (1) (b) a person can be made liable to pay penalty, in addition to the amount of income-tax and super-tax, if any, payable by him in cases falling under cls. (b) and (c), no order for payment of penalty can be against a registered firm, because under the Income Tax Act no tax is made payable by the firm.

PRE_RELIED : Chief Justice Chakravartti, speaking for the Court, observed, "....................... even when construed by its own language the concluding paragraph of section 28 (1) cannot be said to make it a condition precedent that a person must be liable to pay some income-tax or it may be also super-tax if he is to be made liable for a penalty.

PRE_RELIED : Clause (b) of the proviso to my mind emphasizes that meaning of the concluding paragraph of Section 28 (1) and rests on an assumption that under that provision a person may be chargeable to penalty although he may not be chargeable to tax."


Id : 4090
PRE_RELIED : It has been observed even in the said case that the provisions of Section 337(2) of the old Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) provide that the approver who has been tendered pardon must be examined both in the Committing Court and the Court of Sessions it has been held that: "The obligation to make a full and true disclosure would arise whenever the approver is lawfully called upon to give evidence touching the matter; it may be in the Committing court, or, it may be in he Sessions Court.

PRE_RELIED : But, the obligation to make a full and true disclosure rests on the approver at every stage at which he can be lawfully required to give evidence.

PRE_RELIED : If at any stage he either wilfully conceals material particulars or gives false evidence he would failed to comply with the conditions on which the pardon was tendered to him and thereby incurred its forfeiture.

PRE_RELIED : Neither as a matter of reason or logic, nor as a matter PG NO 1099 of statutory interpretation can it be said that S. 339(1) is dependent on or connected with S. 337(2) in the sense that the approver must be examined both in the Committing Court and the Sessions Court before it can be held that he has forfeited his pardon.

PRE_RELIED : It is sufficient if he fails to conform to the conditions on which the pardon has been granted to him at either stage."

PRE_RELIED : This decision has been considered in Emperor v. Shandino Dhaniparto, AIR 1940 (Sind) 114 wherein it has been held that: "When an accused after accepting pardon denies all knowledge of facts before the Committing Magistrate and the case is committed to Sessions Court the pardon cannot be forfeited before the accused is examined in the Sessions Court.

PRE_RELIED : Once a pardon is tendered and accepted, S. 337(2) renders it obligatory for the prosecution to examine the approver both in the Committing Magistrate s Court and in the Sessions Court should the case be committed.

PRE_RELIED : Failure of the prosecution to examine the approver in the Sessions Court vitiates the trial."

PRE_RELIED : This has been made very clear by this Court in the case of A.J. Peiris v. State of Madras, AIR 1954(SC) 616 wherein it has been observed that: ".....We think that the moment the pardon was tendered to the accused he must be presumed to have been discharged whereupon he ceased to be an accused and became a witness."

PRE_RELIED : It is pertinent to refer in this connection the decision of this Court in Laxmipat Choraria and Ors. v.
 State of Maharashtra.

PRE_RELIED : [1968] 2 SCR 626 wherein it has been observed by Hidayatullah, J as he then was that: "....... Under s. 132 a witness shall not be excused from answering any question as to any matter relevant to the matter in issue in any criminal proceeding (among others) upon the ground that the answer to such question will incriminate or may tend directly or indirectly to expose him to a penalty or forfeiture of any kind.

PRE_RELIED : The safeguard to this compulsion is that no such answer which the witness is compelled to give exposes him to any arrest or prosecution or can ii be prove i against him in any criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such answer."


Id : 1711
PRE_RELIED : One class of case, of which Wadero Abdul Rahman v. Sadhuram(1) is a sample, holds that "ordinarily"
means "in the majority of cases" and that it has no reference to the particular case in hand.

PRE_RELIED : This was the view taken in M. S. Sheriff v. Govindan(2).

PRE_RELIED : 
M. S. Sheriff v. The State of Madras and Others,(1) was quoted but the present point was neither considered nor decided there.

PRE_RELIED : Keshardeo Chamria v. Radha Kissen Chamria and Other8(1) and many cases from the High Courts were cited which show that there is much difference of opinion about this but we are fortunately not called upon to decide that question because this is not a case where a Court with jurisdiction has acted under section 476 of the Criminal Procedure Code of its own motion or has acted as a Court of appeal under section 476-B.


Id : 1746

Id : 1720
PRE_RELIED : 
 6. We have by our judgment in Criminal Appeal No. 475 of 1983 (Smt. Yamunabai v. Anantrao Shivram Adhav and another) delivered today held that the marriage of a Hindu woman with a Hindu male with a living spouse performed after the coming in force of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, is null and void and the woman is not entitled to maintenance under s. 125 of the Code.


Id : 1718
PRE_RELIED : Three stages for imposition of tax was culled out by the Apex Court in Chatturam Holiram Ltd.

PRE_RELIED : Vs. CIT reported in AIR 1955 SC 619 and the stages are mentioned as under :- “

PRE_RELIED : There is the declaration of liability, that is the part of the statute which determines what persons in respect of what property are liable.

PRE_RELIED : Next, there is the assessment.

PRE_RELIED : Liability does not depend on assessment.

PRE_RELIED : That, ex hypothesi, has already been fixed.

PRE_RELIED : But assessment particularizes the exact sum which a person liable has to pay.

PRE_RELIED : Lastly, come the methods of recovery if the person taxed does not voluntarily pay”.

PRE_RELIED : 29.     In the above context, the Apex Court in M/s Pine Chemicals Ltd. Vs.
         Assessing Authority reported in (1992)2 SCC 683 declared that whether any amount has been collected unauthorisedly in spite of the exemption, what is the amount and whether it has been collected as tax etc., cannot be scrutinized, in a normal assessment proceeding.

PRE_RELIED : One of the contentions raised in the case before the Supreme Court was that there was a finding that, the assessee had collected sales tax in respect of its sale turnover for which exemption was claimed and as such, the said amount was refundable under Section 8(B) of the Jammu & Kashmir General Sales Tax Act, 1962.

PRE_RELIED : The Court while leaving the question of applicability of Section 8(B) in that case open, held that whether any element of sale tax had merged in the fixation of the sale price and that amounts to collection of sales tax, would have to be decided in a separate proceeding that may have to be initiated under Section 8(B) of the said Act, if the State demands payment under the said provision of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : 
 30.     In a similar situation, where the assessment was completed by levying tax during the period of exemption on the ground that in spite of the exemption being granted, the assessee charged and collected tax, this Court in Mahabir Coke Industries Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Taxes reported in (2003)5 GLR 175 quashed the orders of assessment by holding that if any allegation of unauthorized collection of tax is established, the consequences as provided in Section 65A of the Assam General Sales Tax Act, 1993 which related to forfeiture of the unauthorized collection of tax and/or Section 10 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, as case may be, would follow.

PRE_RELIED : It was thus held that the impugned action of making a general assessment of all the transactions in exercise of powers under Section 17(4) and 9(2) of the 1956 Act and raise a demand for tax, without examining each and every transaction to determine whether any tax was at all collected, cannot be countenanced.


Id : 1723
PRE_RELIED : The law on the above point is neatly summarised in Income Tax Officer v. M.C. Ponnoosse & Ors.

PRE_RELIED : [1970] 1 S.C.R. 678 at pages 681-682 thus : "Now it is open to a soverign legislature to enact laws which have retrospective operation.

PRE_RELIED : Even when the Parliament enacts retrospective laws such laws are - in the words of Willes, J. in Phillips v.
                  Eyre (40 Law J. Rep (N.S.) Q.B. 28 at p.37) - 'no doubt prima facie of questionable policy and contrary to the general principle that legislation by which the conduct of mankind is to be regulated ought, when introduced for the first time, to deal with future acts, and ought not to change the character of past transactions carried on upon the faith of the then existing law.'

PRE_RELIED : The courts will not, therefore, ascribe retrospectivity to new laws affecting rights unless by express words or necessary implication it appears that such was the intention of the legislature.

PRE_RELIED : But where no such language is to be found it has been held by the courts that the person or authority exercising subordinate legislative functions cannot make a rule, regulation or bye- law which can operate with retrospective effect; (see Subba Rao, J. in Dr. Indramani Pyarelal Gupta v. W.R. Nathu & Others 620 (1963 S.C.R. 721) - the majority not having expressed any different opinion on the point; Modi Food Products Ltd. v. Commissioner of Sales Tax U.P. (A.I.R. 1956 All. 35); India Sugar Refineries Ltd. v. State of Mysore (A.I.R. 1960 Mys. 326) and General S. Shivdev Singh & Anr. v. The State of Punjab & Others (1959 P.L.R. 514)."


Id : 1722
PRE_RELIED : The expression "genuine hardship", has been considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of B.M.MALANI V.
CIT [(2008) 306 ITR 196 (SC)], to mean not fake or counterfeit, real, not pretending (not bogus or merely a ruse).

PRE_RELIED : 10. The aforesaid observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court have been considered by the Gujarat High Court in the case of Gujarat Electric Co. Ltd. v. CIT [(2002) 255 ITR 396 (Guj)], wherein, it was held that when the revised return was filed belatedly on account of the ill-health of the officer who was looking after matters pertaining to taxation, the Court held that it was a reason required to be considered for the purpose of condoning the delay under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 119 of the Act.
 11.

PRE_RELIED : In Sitaldas K.Motwani v. Director- General of Income-tax [(2010) 323 ITR 223], the Bombay High Court has explained the phrase "genuine hardship" in the following manner:- "Having heard both the parties, we must observe that while considering the genuine hardship, respondent No.1 was not expected to consider a solitary ground as to whether the petitioner was prevented by any substantial cause from filing return within due time.

PRE_RELIED : Other factors detailed hereinbelow ought to have been taken into account.

PRE_RELIED : 
 X X X X "The Madras High Court in the case of R.Seshammal v. ITO [1999]237 ITR 185, was pleased to observe as under (page 187): "This is hardly the manner in which the State is expected to deal with the citizens, who in their anxiety to comply with all the requirements of the Act pay monies as advance tax to the State, even though the monies were not actually required to be paid by them and there-after seek refund of the monies so paid by mistake after the proceedings under the Act are dropped by the authorities concerned.

PRE_RELIED : The State is not entitled to plead the hyper technical plea of limitation in such a situation to avoid return of the amounts.

PRE_RELIED : 12. In Pala Marketing Co-operative Society Ltd., v. Union of India and others [(2009) 311 ITR (Ker)], the Kerala High Court while considering the expression "genuine hardship"
 has observed as under:- "Even though courts while considering application for condonation of delay under section 5 of the Limitation Act may be justified in considering the merits of the case and consequences to the party for non- consideration of the case on the merits, I do not think section 119(2)(b) is just an incorporation of section 5 of the Limitation Act.


PRE_RELIED : What is stated in section 119(2)(b) is that if the Board considers desirable or expedient for avoiding genuine hardship to the assessee, it should condone the delay.

PRE_RELIED : In other words, what the Board should consider is hardship to the party if delay is not condoned.

PRE_RELIED : The Board should condone the delay if failure to condone the delay causes genuine hardship to the assessee, no matter whether the delay in filing return is meticulously explained or not.


Id : 1721
PRE_RELIED : 
In this decision expenditure for securing an advantage which was to last at least for a period of five years was not treated to have enduring benefit.

PRE_RELIED : In M.A. Jabbar v. C.I.T.
Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, [1968] 2 SCR 413, the assessee was carrying on the business of supplying lime and sand, and for the purposes of acquiring sand he had obtained a lease of a river bed from the State Government for a period of 11 months.

PRE_RELIED : Under the lease he had to pay large amount of lease money for the grant of an exclusive right to carry away sand within, under or upon the land.

PRE_RELIED : The assessee in proceedings for assessment of incometax claimed deduction with regard to the amount paid as lease money.

PRE_RELIED : The Court held that the expenditure incurred by the assessee was not related to the acquisition of an asset or a right of permanent character instead the expenditure was for a specific object of ena- bling the assessee to remove the sand lying on the surface of the land which was stock-in-trade of the business, there- fore, the expenditure was a revenue expenditure.

PRE_RELIED : In Commissioner of Inland Revenue v. Carron Company, [1966-69] 45 Tax Cases 13 the assessee carried on the business of iron founders which was incor- 325 porated by a Charter granted to it in 1773.

PRE_RELIED : By passage of time many of its features had become archaic and unsuited to modern conditions and the company's commercial performance was suffering a progressive decline.

PRE_RELIED : The Charter of the company placed restriction on the company's borrowing powers and it placed restriction on voting rights of certain mem- bers.

PRE_RELIED : The company decided to petition for a supplementary Charter providing for the vesting of the management in Board of Directors and for the removal of the limitation on compa- ny's borrowing powers and restrictions on the issue and transfer of shares.

PRE_RELIED : The company's petition was contested by dissenting share-holders in court.

PRE_RELIED : The company settled the litigation under which it had to pay the cost of legal action and buy out the holdings of the dissenting share- holders and in pursuance thereof a supplementary Charter was granted.

PRE_RELIED : In assessment proceedings, the company claimed deduction of payments made by it towards the cost of obtain- ing the Charter, the amounts paid to the dissenting share- holders and expensed in the action.

PRE_RELIED : The Special Commissioner held that the company was entitled to the deductions.

PRE_RELIED : On appeal the House of Lords held that since the object of the new Charter was to remove obstacle to profitable trading, and the engagement of a competent Manager and the removal of restrictions on borrowing facilitated the day-to-day trading operation of the company, the expenditure was on income account.

PRE_RELIED : The House of Lords considered the test laid down by Lord Cave L.C. in British Insulated Company's case and held that the payments made by the company, were for the purpose of removing of disability of the company trading operation which prejudiced its operation.

PRE_RELIED : This was achieved without acquisition of any tangible or intangible asset or without creation of any new branch of trading activity.

PRE_RELIED : From a commercial and business point of view nothing in the nature of additional fixed capital was thereby achieved.

PRE_RELIED : The Court pointed out that there is a sharp distinction between the removal of a disability on one hand payment for which is a revenue payment, and the bringing into existence of an advantage, payment for which may be a capital payment.

PRE_RELIED : 
Since, in the case before the Court, the Company had made payments for removal of disabilities which confined their business under the out of date Charter of 1773, the expendi- ture was on revenue account.

PRE_RELIED : In Empire Jute Company v. C.I.
T, [1980] 124 ITR I, this Court held that expenditure made by an assessee for the purpose of removing the restriction on the number of working hours with a view to increase its profits, was in the nature of revenue expenditure.

PRE_RELIED : The Court observed that if the advantage consists merely in facilitat- ing the assessee's trading operations of enabling the man- agement and conduct of the assessee's business to be carried on more efficiently or more profitably while leaving 326 he fixed capital untouched, the expenditure would be on revenue account even though the advantage may endure for an indefinite future.


Id : 1767
PRE_RELIED : 
 9. In the case of Lohit KoushalVersusState of Harayana (2009), 17 SCC 106, it has been held that, kidnapping as understood U/s. 364 A IPC is a truly reprehensible crime and when a helpless child is kidnapped for ransom and that too by a close relative, the incident becomes all the more unacceptable.

PRE_RELIED : 
 22. The principle how the circumstances be considered and weighed are well settled and summed up in Sharada Biridi Chand Sarada VersusState of Maharashtra (194) 4 SCC 116 as under.

PRE_RELIED : There is not only a grammatical, but, a legal distinction between " may be proved" and " must be or should be proved" as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade and anotherVersus State of Maharashtra, (1973) 2 SCC 793 where the observations were made : " Certainly, it is primary principle that the accused must be and not merely may be guilty before a Court can convict and the mental distance between "may be" and "must be" is long and divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions

PRE_RELIED : .: (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty.

PRE_RELIED : 
 (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency.

PRE_RELIED : 
 (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have been done by the accused.

PRE_RELIED : 
 In the case of Sebak PerumarVersusState of Tamilnadu, 1991, 3 SCC 471, the Hon'ble Apex Court has cautioned that, undue sympathy to impose indequate sentence would do more harm to the Justice delivery system to undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of law and society could not long endure under serious threats.


Id : 1777
PRE_RELIED : 
 24) The recourse followed in the case in hand by the High Court in substituting the death penalty by imposing the sentence for a term not less than 25 years' actual imprisonment has got the seal of approval of this court in V. Sriharan (supra) case, which has been consistently and continuously followed in a catena of later decisions also.

PRE_RELIED : [Ref. (i) Raju Jagdish Paswan vs. The State of Maharashtra ; 2019 (1) SCALE 735; (ii) Jagdish Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh; 2019(3) SCALE 888 & (iii) Sachin Kumar Singhraha vs. State of Madhya Pradesh; 2019(5)SCALE 39] 25) The cited decisions have indeed more intuitive and persuasive value in the instant case for the reason that the death sentence in those cases was commuted regardless of its confirmation by the High Court(s).


Id : 1773

Id : 1771
PRE_RELIED : 
 18. The second case cited is State of U.P. vs Arun Kumar Gupta (AIR 2003 SC 801).

PRE_RELIED : In that case the witnesses who had seen accused and deceased entering house of accused, disclosed that fact at the time of his examination.

PRE_RELIED : It was found that the venue of offence was most unsuitable for offence.

PRE_RELIED : 
 19. ln

PRE_RELIED : the case of Joseph s/o Kooveli Poulo vs State of Kerala (2000) 5 SCC 197, deceased, an employee of a school was taken away from the school by the accused-appellant under a false pretext.


Id : 1768

Id : 1755

Id : 1751
PRE_RELIED : 12. In Re. Suo Motu Proceedings against R. Karuppan, Advocate4, this Court observed as under: "13.

PRE_RELIED : Courts are entrusted with the powers of dispensation and adjudication of justice of the rival claims of the parties besides determining the criminal liability of the offenders for offences committed against the society.

PRE_RELIED : The courts are further expected to do justice quickly and impartially not being biased by any extraneous considerations.

PRE_RELIED : Justice dispensation system would be wrecked if statutory restrictions are not imposed upon the litigants, who attempt to mislead the court by filing and relying upon false evidence particularly in cases, the adjudication of which is dependent upon the statement of facts.

PRE_RELIED : If the result of the proceedings are to be respected, these issues before the courts must be resolved to the extent possible in accordance 4 (2001) 5 SCC 289 with the truth.

PRE_RELIED : The purity of proceedings of the court cannot be permitted to be sullied by a party on frivolous, vexatious or insufficient grounds or relying upon false evidence inspired by extraneous considerations or revengeful desire to harass or spite his opponent.

PRE_RELIED : Sanctity of the affidavits has to be preserved and protected discouraging the filing of irresponsible statements, without any regard to accuracy."

PRE_RELIED : In Mohan Singh v. Amar Singh5 case, it was observed by this Court : "36. ...

PRE_RELIED : Tampering with the record of judicial proceedings and filing of false affidavit in a court of law has the tendency of causing obstruction in the due course of justice.

PRE_RELIED : It undermines and obstructs free flow of the unsoiled stream of justice and aims at striking a blow at the rule of law.

PRE_RELIED : The stream of justice has to be kept clear and pure and no one can be permitted to take liberties with it by soiling its purity."         Mr. S.S.
13.

PRE_RELIED : We have noticed         a disturbing trend of some medical colleges in projecting fake faculty and patients for obtaining 6 (2015) 4 SCC 580  45.6 -Medical Council of India v. M.G.R. Educational & Research Institute University and (2016) 11 SCC 530 31, 31.2 & 31.4  Medical Council of India v. Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS) permission for admission of students.


Id : 1732
PRE_RELIED : Kania C.J. at pp. 111-113 said that the term 'law' in that Article must mean the law of the State or enacted law, and not rules of natural justice.

PRE_RELIED : Fazl Ali J. who was in the minority, said at page 169 that 'law' must include certain principles of natural justice.

PRE_RELIED : Patanjali Sastri J. at p. 1 99 said that 'law' in Art. 21 means positive or State-made law'.

PRE_RELIED : Mahajan J. at page 226 expressed no opinion on the point.

PRE_RELIED : Mukherjea J. at p. 278 said that "in article 21 the word 'law' has been used in the sense of State-made law and not as an equivalent of law in the abstract or general sense embodying the principles of natural justice."

PRE_RELIED : Das J. said at page 309 that "there is no scope for introducing the principles of natural justice in Article 21 and 'procedure established by law' must mean procedure established by law made by the State which, as defined, includes Parliament and the Legislatures of the States."

PRE_RELIED : As explained by four of the learned Judges in A. K. Gapalan's case(1), the expression 'law' in Art. 21 means enacted or Statemade law, and not the general principles of natural _justice.

PRE_RELIED : In Pandit M. S. M. Sharma v. Shri Sri Krishna Sinha and others(1), this Court held that a deprivation of personal liberty of any person by a Legislative Assembly of a State in exercise (1) [1958] S.C.R. 1226.                         (2) [1950] S.C.R. 88.
 (3) [1959] Stipp. I S.C.R.8 6.
 929, of its power to punish for its contempt is according to a procedure established by law and does not contravene Art.
 21. Art.194(3) of the Constitution provides that "the powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the Legislature of a State, and of the members and the committees of a House of such Legislature, shall be such as may from time to time be defined by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined, shall be those of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and committees, at the commencement of this Constitution."

PRE_RELIED : Article 194(3) thus confers on the Legislative Assembly.

PRE_RELIED : of a State the existing inherent powers enjoyed by the British House of Commons including the power to punish for its contempt.

PRE_RELIED : Art. 208 (1 ) empowers the Legislative Assembly to make rules regulating its procedure.

PRE_RELIED : As explained in Pandit Sharma's case(1), these powers and the procedure prescribed by the rules has the sanction of enacted law and an order of committal for contempt of the Assembly is according to procedure established by law.

PRE_RELIED : Das C.J., speaking for four learned Judges said at page 861 : "Art, 194(3) confers on the Legislative Assembly those powers, privileges and immunities and Art. 208 confers power on it to frame rules.

PRE_RELIED : The Bihar Legislative Assembly has framed rules in exercise of its powers under that Article.

PRE_RELIED : It follows, therefore, that Art.
194(3) read with the rules so framed has laid down the procedure for enforcing its powers, privileges and im- munities.

PRE_RELIED : If, therefore, the Legislative Assembly has the powers, privileges and immunities of the House of Commons and if the petitioner is eventually deprived of his personal liberty as a result of the proceedings before the Committee of Privileges, such deprivation will be in accordance with procedure established by law and the petitioner cannot complain of the breach, 'I 'Actual or threatened, of his fundamental right under Art. 21."

PRE_RELIED : Subba Rao J. in his minority judgment in that case and the Court in Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 2 did not say anything to the contrary an this point.

PRE_RELIED : 
The Constitution confirmed and (1) L.R. 61 I.A. 203,213.
 931 re-vested in the High Court all its existing powers and jurisdiction including its inherent powers, and its power to make rules.

PRE_RELIED : When the Constitution or any enacted law has embraced and confirmed the inherent powers and jurisdiction of the High Court which previously existed, that power and jurisdiction has the sanction of an enacted saw" within the meaning of Art. 21 as explained in A. K. Gopalan's(l) case.


Id : 1731
PRE_RELIED : Two of the said decisions are as follows : 1. CIT v. Sri Biluru Gurubasava Pattina Sahakari Sangha Niyamitha in ITA No.5006/2013 2. CIT vs. Bangalore Commercial Transporter Credit Society in ITA No.351/2011 & ITA No.599/2013

PRE_RELIED : In interpreting Section 80 P (4) in CIT v. Sri Biluru Gurubasava Pattina Sahakari Sangha Niyamitha of the I T Act, it was held as follows : "If a Co-operative Bank is exclusively carrying on banking business, then the income derived from the said business cannot be deducted in computing the total income of the assessee.

PRE_RELIED : The said income is liable for tax.

PRE_RELIED : A Co-operative bank as defined under the Banking Regulation Act includes the primary agricultural credit society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank.

PRE_RELIED : 
 In CIT vs. Bangalore Commercial Transporter Credit Society (supra), this court has cited with approval the following differences between a co-operative society and a co-operative bank - as depicted by the Tribunal, in tabular form thus : Nature  Co-operative society Co-operative Society registered       under registered       under Banking Regulation Karnataka            Co- Act, 1949                 operative Society Act, 1959 Registration

PRE_RELIED : Under the Banking Co-operative Societies Regulation Act, 1949 Act, 1959 and         Co-operative Societies Act, 1959

PRE_RELIED : Nature of 1.

PRE_RELIED : 
 Proposition:

PRE_RELIED : The issue is covered by the decision of a Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court in the case of Sri. Biluru Gurubasava Pattina Sahakari Sangha Niyamitha, Bagalkot in ITA No.5006/2013 dated 5th February 2014:

PRE_RELIED : The substantial question of law pleaded on behalf of the Revenue in the said case was as follows: "In the facts and circumstances of this case, whether the Revisional Authority was justified in invoking his power under Section 263 of the Act without the foundational fact of assessee being co-operative bank was not there?"
 

PRE_RELIED : 
 Therefore, in the case of an assessee  Co-operative Society claiming deductions under Section 80P, an examination of the factual aspects will have to be conducted by the Revenue authorities on the basis of the facts and materials on record to conclude whether the assessee  Society is to be treated as a `primary co-operative bank' which fulfills the above three conditions.
 9.

PRE_RELIED : In the light of the above contentions and on an examination of the relevant legal provisions, it is to be noticed at the outset that this court in the appeal in ITA 351/ 2011, CIT v. Bangalore Commercial Transport Credit Co-operative Society Limited, decided on 27.6.2014, had framed the following substantial questions of law : "(i) Whether the Tribunal was correct in holding that the provision of sub-section (4) of Section 80P of the Income Tax Act are applicable only to co- operative Banks and not to credit Co-operative Societies, which are engaged in business of banking, including providing credit facilities to their members?


Id : 1766
PRE_RELIED : The position of a Special Judge is that of a Magistrate as settled by the Apex Court in A.R.ANTULAY vs- RAMDAS SRINIWAS NAYAK AND ANOTHER (AIR 1984 SC 718).

PRE_RELIED : 
 9. In Rajendra Kumar Sitaram Pande & Others vs- Uttam & Another reported in AIR 1999 S.C. 1028, the Apex Court observed thus: " ....... it would not be appropriate to hold that an order directing issuance of process is purely interlocutory and, therefore, the bar under sub- section (2) of section 397 would apply.

PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, it must be held to be intermediate or quasi final and, therefore, the revisional jurisdiction under section 397 could be exercised against the same. . . . ."
 10.

PRE_RELIED : Yet, in another judgment, in the case of Urmila Devi vs- Yudhvir Singh [(2013) 15 SCC 624], on a survey of earlier judgments covering the controversy, the legal position was asserted to the effect that the revisional jurisdiction under Section 397 of the Code is available to the aggrieved party challenging the order of the Magistrate directing issuance of summons.

PRE_RELIED : In India Carat (Pvt.) Ltd. vs- State of Karnataka (1989(2) SCC 132), three Judges' Bench of the Apex Court had dealt in detail the power of the Magistrate under Sections 90(1)(b), 200, 202 and 204 of IPC, as under: " 16.

PRE_RELIED : The position is, therefore, now well settled

PRE_RELIED : that upon receipt of a police report under Section 173(2) a Magistrate is entitled to take cognizance of an offence under Section 190(1)(b) of the Code even if the police report is to the effect that no case is made out against the accused.

PRE_RELIED : The Magistrate can take into account the statements of the witnesses examined by the police during the investigation and take cognizance of the offence complained of and order the issue of process to the accused.

PRE_RELIED : 
Section 190(1)(b) does not lay down that a Magistrate can take cognizance of an offence only if the Investigating Officer gives an opinion that the investigation has made out a case against the accused.

PRE_RELIED : The Magistrate can ignore the conclusion arrived at by the Investigating Officer and independently apply his mind to the facts emerging from the investigation and take cognizance of the case, if he thinks fit, in exercise of his powers under Section 190(1)(b) and direct the issue of process to the accused.

PRE_RELIED : The Magistrate is not bound in such a situation to follow the procedure laid down in Sections 200 and 202 of the Code for taking cognizance of a case under Section 190(1)(a) though it is open to him to act under Section 200 or Section 202 also.

PRE_RELIED : The High Court was, therefore, wrong in taking the view that the Second Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate was not entitled to direct the registration of a case against the second respondent and order the issue of summons to him."
 15.

PRE_RELIED : Same legal position is reiterated by the Apex Court in its later judgment i.e., State of Orissa vs- Habibullah Khan [(2003) 12 SCC 129] and it was observed that the Magistrate can take into account the statements of the witnesses examined by the Police during investigation and take cognizance of the offence complained of and order the issue of process to the accused.

PRE_RELIED : 
 19. In Pepsi Food Limited Vs. Judicial Magistrate reported in 1998(5) SCC 749 the Hon'ble Supreme Court highlighted the importance of the stage, the Magistrate issues summons to the accused persons in respect of the alleged offences.

PRE_RELIED : Para-28 relevant for the moment reads as follows: "28. Summoning of an accused in a criminal case is a serious matter.

PRE_RELIED : Criminal law cannot be set into motion as a matter of course.

PRE_RELIED : It is not that the complainant has to bring only two witnesses to support his allegations in the complaint to have the criminal law set into motion.

PRE_RELIED : The order of the Magistrate summoning the accused must reflect that he has applied his mind to the facts of the case and the law applicable thereto.

PRE_RELIED : He has to examine the nature of allegations made in the complaint and the evidence both oral and documentary in support thereof and would that be sufficient for the complainant to succeed in bringing charge home to the accused.

PRE_RELIED : It is not that the Magistrate is a silent spectator at the time of recording of preliminary evidence before summoning of the accused.

PRE_RELIED : The Magistrate has to carefully scrutinize the evidence brought on record and may even himself put questions to the complainant and his witnesses to elicit answers to find out the truthfulness of the allegations or otherwise and then examine if any offence is prima facie committed by all or any of the accused".
 20.

PRE_RELIED : In M/s GHCL Employees Stock Option Trust's case (supra), the omission on the part of the Magistrate for not recording his satisfaction in his order issuing summons about the prima facie case against the accused and the role played by them in their official capacity was strongly taken note of.

PRE_RELIED : 
 21. In Sunil Bharathi Mittal's case (supra) at para.48 it was held thus: "48. Sine qua non for taking cognizance of the offence is the application of mind by the Magistrate and his satisfaction that the allegations, if proved, would constitute an offence.

PRE_RELIED : It is, therefore, imperative that on a complaint or on a police report, the Magistrate is bound to consider the question as to whether the same discloses commission of an offence and is required to form such an opinion in this respect.

PRE_RELIED : When he does so & decides to issue process, he shall be said to have taken cognizance.

PRE_RELIED : At the stage of taking cognizance, the only consideration before the court remains to consider judiciously whether the material on which the prosecution proposes to prosecute the accused brings out a prima facie case or not."
 22.

PRE_RELIED : In the case of Mehmood Ul Rehman vs.
Khazir Mohammad Tunda and Others reported in (2015) 12 SCC 420, it was observed at para Nos.21 and 22 thus: "21.

PRE_RELIED : Under Section 190(1)(b) CrPC, the Magistrate has the advantage of a police report and under Section 190(1)(c) CrPC, he has the information or knowledge of commission of an offence.

PRE_RELIED : But under Section 190(1)(a) CrPC, he has only a complaint before him.

PRE_RELIED : The Code hence specifies that "a complaint of facts which constitute such offence".

PRE_RELIED : Therefore, if the complaint, on the face of it, does not disclose the commission of any offence, the Magistrate shall not take cognizance under Section 190(1)(a) CrPC.

PRE_RELIED : 
         The complaint is simply to be rejected.


Id : 1765

Id : 1782
PRE_RELIED : 
 15.  In the case of Mukesh and another .vs. State (NCT of Delhi)  (2017) 6 Supreme Court Cases 1, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, after taking into account various earlier judgments pertaining to authenticity of DNA test, has held as follows:- "228.

PRE_RELIED : From the aforesaid authorities , it is quite clear that DNA report deserves to be accepted unless it is absolutely dented and for non-acceptance of the same, it is to be established that there had been no quality control or quality assurance.

PRE_RELIED : If the sampling is proper and if there is no evidence as to tampering of samples, the DNA test report is to be accepted."
 


Id : 1780
PRE_RELIED : In this background, similar claim came to be considered by a co-ordinate bench of this Court in the case of VYSYA BANK LTD., VS. JOINT COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX AND ANOTHER [2000 (158) CTR (KAR) 60] wherein it has been held that jurisdiction to attach the fixed deposit by the Department and obligation of the Bank to make payment of the amount even before maturity of the fixed deposit receipts cannot be found fault with.

PRE_RELIED : It has been held as under: "10. Power under section 226 has been given to the Income Tax Officer to recover in the modes provided the amount which is outstanding.

PRE_RELIED : Power under section 226 could be exercised by one or more of the methods provided in the section and the certificate of the Tax Recovery Officer has been issued under section 222.

PRE_RELIED : Section 226(3) contemplated that the Income Tax Officer may require any person at any time or from time to time (1) from whom money is due, (2) or may become due to the assessee, (3) any person who holds money for an assessee, (4) or may subsequently hold money on account of an assessee, to pay to the assessing officer or Tax Recovery Officer either forthwith upon the money becoming due or being held or at or within the time specified in the notice (not being before the money becomes due or is held).

PRE_RELIED : There should be an obligation on the person on whom notice is served to pay money to the assessee i.e., the subsisting relationship of a debtor and creditor is sine qua non for the exercise of the power under the section.

PRE_RELIED : The relationship of the petitioner-bank and the assessee is that of a debtor and creditor and, therefore, the Income Tax Officer has jurisdiction to attach the amount of fixed deposit receipts irrespective of the fact that the amount is payable at a later period, as on the date of service of notice the relationship of the bank and the assessee as that of debtor and creditor cannot be denied.
 11. Section 226(3)(iv) of the Act

PRE_RELIED : provides that every person to whom a notice is issued is bound to comply with such notice and with reference to the banking company it is provided that it is not necessary for any deposit receipt to be produced before payment is made notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary.

PRE_RELIED : 
 11.1. In view of the judgment of the Apex Court in Budda Pictures case [1967 (65) ITR 620], there has to be subsisting relationship between the garnishee and the assessee.


Id : 1778
PRE_RELIED : 
 Bhagwati, J. has quoted the above passage with approval in the case of E.D. Sassoon & Company Ltd. and others v. Com- missioner of Income-tax, Bombay City.('2) Almost to the same effect ,was the view (1) [1911] 1 Ch. 92, 98.  (2) 26 I.T.R. 27 at page 46.
 643 expressed by Mahajan, J. as he then was, in the case of Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay v. Ahmedbhai Umarbhai & Co., Bombay(1) In Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay City v. Bipinchandra Maganlal & Co. Ltd.('2) Shah, J., as he then was, delivering the judgment on behalf of the Court while interpreting the expression "smallness of profits" occur- ring in section 23A of the 1922 Act said at page 296: "A company normally distributes dividends out of its business profits and not out of its assessa- ble income.

PRE_RELIED : There is no definable relation between the assessable income and the profits of a business concerned in a commercial sense.

PRE_RELIED : Computation of income for purposes of assessment of income-tax is based on a variety of artificial rules and takes into account several fictional receipts, deductions and allowances ..............

PRE_RELIED : Smallness of the profit in section 23A has to be adjudged in the light of commercial principles and not in the light of total receipts, actual or fictional."
 

PRE_RELIED : The same view has been expressed by this Court in Gobald Motor Service (P) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Ma- dras(3).

PRE_RELIED : We think that the term "profits" occurring in section 2(6A)(e) of the 1922 Act means profits in the com- mercial sense-that is to say the profits made by the Company in the real and true sense of the term.

PRE_RELIED : ,We may just give one example.

PRE_RELIED : Suppose the assessable profit of a company is Rs. 1,00,000/- out of which the Company had to pay a tax under the Income-tax Act--say to the extent of Rs.
 30,000/-. .Although payment of tax is not a sum deductible from the assessable profits of the Company, in the commer- cial sense the Company would be left with a sum of Rs.
 70,000/- only as profits.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The Gujarat High Court in the case of Viramgam Mills Co.
Ltd. (supra) was concerned with the question as to whether the normal depreciation reserve of .'the Company could be taken to be the accumulations of past profits within the meaning of the proviso to section 23A of the 1922 Act as it stood at the relevant time.

PRE_RELIED : It held that it could not form part of the accumulated past profits as in the words of Wixon (vide Wixon's Accounts Hand Book) it was "the estimat- ed 645 expiration of asset value" or as observed by Paton in his Accountants' Hand Book, Third edition it is an out-of-pocket cost as any other cost.

PRE_RELIED : Says the learned author in the above book at p. 746 thus: "There is still widespread misapprehension as to the precise significance of the depreciation charge.

PRE_RELIED : It is often deemed a more or less imagi- nary and hypothetical :element, and is sharply contrasted with the regular "out-of-pocket" oper- ating costs.

PRE_RELIED : As a matter of fact there is nothing at all imaginary about depreciation as a cost of business operation and at bottom it is just as much 'an out-of-pocket cost as any other.

PRE_RELIED : The deprecia- tion charge is merely the periodic operating aspect of fixed-asset costs, and there is no doubt as to the reality of such costs.

PRE_RELIED : Far from being a non-out-of pocket charge depreciation represents the extreme example of prepayment."

PRE_RELIED : 
 Tea Estate India Pvt. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax, West Bengal 11 (and vice versa)(2) one of us (Khanna, J.) delivering the judgment on behalf of the Court has interpreted the, expression "accumulated profits" occur- ring in clause (c) of section '2(6A) of the 1922 Act to include the amount of development rebate in the commercial sense.

PRE_RELIED : It has been stated at page 794: "The acceptance of the contention would necessarily postulate reading in section 2(6A)(c) the words "accumulated profits as are liable to be taxed under the Act".

PRE_RELIED : Lord Herscheil in the case of Ann Bouch and Wil- liam Bouch v. William Bouch Sprou(1) was considering as to what was the nature and substance of the transaction in question in that case.

PRE_RELIED : The learned and the noble Lord said at page 398: "I think we must look both at the 'substance and form of the transaction ........

PRE_RELIED : And it was obviously contemplated, and was, I think, certain that no money would, in fact, pass from the company to the shareholders, but that the entire sum would remain in their hands as paid-up capi- tal."

PRE_RELIED : And finally 'it was said at page 399: "I cannot, therefore, avoid the conclusion that the substance of the whole transaction was, and was intended to be, to convert the undivided profits into paid-up capital upon newly-creat- ed shares."

PRE_RELIED : 
 The Madras High Court has pointed out in Commissioner Income-tax, Madras v.K. Srinivasan and others(2), to quote the placitum only: "For the purposes of section 2(6A)(e) of the Income tax Act, 1922, "accumulated profits" include general reserves.
 (1)                  12  Appeal        Cases,      385.
 (2) 50 I.T.R. 788.
 648 Unless the profit is capitalised in some form or other mere transfer of the profits to any reserve account will not take away from profits the charac- ter of accumulated profits."
 In Sheth Haridas Achratlal v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay North, Kutch and Saurashtra, Baroda(1)--Chief Justice Chagla delivering the judgment on behalf of the Bench of the Bombay High Court said at page 690: "But when we compare the language used by the Legislature in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (d) and when we note the omission of the qualifying words in sub-clause (c) then it is clear that the Legislature advisedly did not intend to subject to tax those accumulated profits which had been capitalised."


Id : 1737

Id : 1736

Id : 1735
PRE_RELIED : 
 The apex court, in the decision cited by the learned Counsel for the appellant, in S.S.Chheena vs. Vijaya Kumar Mahajan and another, 2010 (4) Crimes 101, has discussed and reviewed the case law in this regard, with reference to the following authorities :- Mahendra Singh vs. State of M.P., 1995 Supp (3) SCC 731

PRE_RELIED : In this case, the allegations levelled against the accused were as follows: " I...

PRE_RELIED : My mother-in-law and husband and sister-in-law (husband's elder brother's wife) harassed me.

PRE_RELIED : My husband Mahendra wants to marry a second time.

PRE_RELIED : He has illicit connections with my sister-in-law.

PRE_RELIED : Because of these reasons and being harassed, I want to die by burning"
 

PRE_RELIED : The court concluded that by no stretch of imagination, the ingredients of abetment are attracted on the statement of the deceased.

PRE_RELIED : In Ramesh Kumar vs. State of Chhattisgarh, (2001)9 SCC 618, a three-judge bench of the apex court had occasion to deal with a case of similar nature.

PRE_RELIED : In an argument between a husband and wife, the husband had stated that "you are free to do whatever you wish and go wherever you like".

PRE_RELIED : 
Thereafter, the wife is said to have committed suicide.

PRE_RELIED : The apex court, in that circumstance, examined the different shades of the meaning of "instigation" as hereunder:- "20. Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or encourage to do `an act'.

PRE_RELIED : To satisfy the requirement of instigation though it is not necessary that actual words must be used to that effect or what constitutes instigation must necessarily and specifically be suggestive of the consequence.

PRE_RELIED : Yet a reasonable certainty to incite the consequence must be capable of being spelt out.

PRE_RELIED : 
               The present one is not a case where the accused had by his acts or omission or by a continued course of conduct created such circumstances that the deceased was left with no other option except to commit suicide in which case an instigation may have been inferred.

PRE_RELIED : A word uttered in the fit of anger or emotion without intending the consequences to actually follow cannot be said to be instigation."

PRE_RELIED : In State of West Bengal vs. Orilal Jaiswal, (1994)1 SCC 73, the apex court has expressed that the court should be extremely careful in assessing the facts and circumstances of each case and the evidence adduced in the trial court for the purpose of finding whether cruelty meted out to the victim had in fact induced her to end life by committing suicide.

PRE_RELIED : If it appears to the court that a victim committing suicide was hyper sensitive to ordinary petulance, discord and differences in domestic life quite common to the society to which the victim belonged and such petulance, discord and differences were not expected to induce a similarly circumstanced individual in a given society to commit suicide, the conscience of the court should not be satisfied for basing a finding that the accused charged of abetting the offence of suicide should be found guilty.

PRE_RELIED : 
 In Chitresh Kumar Chopra vs. State, (2009) 16 SCC 605, the court dealt with the meaning of the word "instigation"
and "goading".

PRE_RELIED : The court has opined that there should be intention to provoke, incite or encourage the doing of an act by the latter.

PRE_RELIED : Each person's suicidability pattern is different from the other.

PRE_RELIED : Each person has his own idea of self-esteem and self-respect.

PRE_RELIED : Therefore, it is impossible to lay down any straitjacket formula in dealing with such cases.

PRE_RELIED : Each case has to be decided on the basis of its own facts and circumstances.

PRE_RELIED : 
Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person or intentionally aiding a person in doing of a thing.

PRE_RELIED : Without a positive act on the part of the accused to instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained.

PRE_RELIED : The intention of the legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by the apex court were clear that in order to convict a person under section 306 of the IPC, there has to be a clear mens rea to commit the offence and it also requires an active act or direct act which lead the deceased to commit suicide seeing no option and that act must have been intended to push the deceased into such a position that he committed suicide.
 


Id : 1793

Id : 1792

Id : 1789

Id : 1761
PRE_RELIED : 
 29. I have perused the decision relied upon by the leaned counsel appearing for the accused, reported in (2010) 15 SCC 369.

PRE_RELIED : Persuing the said decision, Their Lordships of Hon'ble Supreme Court have laid down the proposition as under : "Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic substances Act, 1985 Ss.42, 44, 53, 56, 57, 67 and 68  Investigation by the very officer who registered crime  Reiterated, not conducive to fair and impartial investigation  

PRE_RELIED : Hence, reversal of conviction, upheld  

PRE_RELIED : 5 kg opium recovered from accused  

PRE_RELIED : Accused was convicted by Special Judge and was sentenced to 10 years' RI with a fine of Rs.1,00,000 - Officer, who had registered crime, also investigated the said crime  

PRE_RELIED : Hence, held, High Court was justified in acquitting accused  

PRE_RELIED : Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, Ss.156 and 161."
 30.

PRE_RELIED : Learned counsel for the accused No.2 has relied upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in AIR 2011 SC 1335 (1) in the case of ASHOK ALIAS DANGRA JAISWAL V.
 STATE OF M.P. In para No.11 of the said decision

PRE_RELIED : Their Lordships have observed as under: "11.

PRE_RELIED : The FSL report came on March 21, 2005, and on that basis the police submitted charge- sheet against the accused on March 31, 2005, but the alleged narcotic substance that was seized from the accused including the appellant was deposited in the Malkhana about two months later on May 28, 2005, there is no explanation where the seized substance was kept in the meanwhile."


Id : 1758
PRE_RELIED : 
This observation has been overruled being in the nature of obiter dicta by this Court in a subsequent decision in Khushal Rao v. State of Bombay, [1958] S.C.R. 552.

PRE_RELIED : The same view was taken by this Court in the case of Kusa & Ors. v.
State of Orissa, A.I.R. 1980 S.C. 559 at 562 para 9.

PRE_RELIED : It is pertinent to refer to the observation of this Court on this point made in State of Assam v. Muaizuddin Ahmed, [1983] 2 S.C.C. 14 at 19 para 10 which are in the following terms: 1048 "Thus, the law is now well settled that there can be conviction on the basis of dying declaration and it is not at all necessary to have a corroboration provided the court is satisfied that the dying declaration is a truthful dying declaration and not vitiated in any other manner."

PRE_RELIED : 
It has been observed by this Court in Jayarajl v. State of Tamil Nadu, A.I.R. 1976 S.C. 1519 at 522 para 16 which reads: "When the deponent (while making his dying declaration) was in severe bodily pain (because of stab injuries in the abdoman) and words were scare, his natural impulse would be to tell the Magistrate, without wasting his breath on details as to who stabed him.

PRE_RELIED : The very brevity of the dying declaration, in the circumstances of the case, far from being a suspicious circumstance, was an index of its being true and free from the taint of tutoring, more so when the substratum of the dying declaration was fully consistent with the occular account given by the eyewitness."


Id : 1757
PRE_RELIED : In Mukeshbhai Gopalbhai Barot (supra), this Court had occasion to consider Sections 161 and 162 of Cr.P.C. and Section 32 of the Evidence Act.

PRE_RELIED : In the above case, the victim, who received burn injuries on 14.09.1993 was admitted to Civil Hospital.

PRE_RELIED :      Her statement was recorded by Executive Magistrate and by the Police.

PRE_RELIED : The statement recorded by police under Section 161 Cr.P.C. was discarded by the High Court taking the view that it had no evidentiary value.

PRE_RELIED : The view of the High Court was not accepted by this Court.

PRE_RELIED : In paragraph Nos. 4 and 5, this Court held that the statement of persons recorded under Section 161 can be treated as dying declaration after death.

PRE_RELIED : In paragraph Nos. 4 and 5, following has been laid down:- "4.

PRE_RELIED : We have considered the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the parties.

PRE_RELIED : At the very outset, we must deal with the observa- tions of the High Court that the dying decla- rations Ex.44 and 48 could not be taken as ev- idence in view of the provisions of Section 161 and 162 of the Cr.P.C. when read cumula- tively.

PRE_RELIED : These findings are, however, erro- neous.

PRE_RELIED : Sub-Section (1) of Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 deals with several situations including the relevance of a state- ment made by a person who is dead.

PRE_RELIED : The provi- sion reads as under: Sec.32.  Cases  in  which statements of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is relevant. - Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, appears to the Court unreasonable,

PRE_RELIED : are themselves relevant facts in the following cases:- (1) When it relates to cause of death. - When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which the cause of that person's death comes into question.

PRE_RELIED : 
 Such statements are relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when they were made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into question."
 We see that the aforesaid dying declara- tions are relevant in view of the above provi- sion.

PRE_RELIED : 
 11. A similar view has been expressed by this Court in Sri Bhagwan (supra), where this Court had occasion to consider Section 161 Cr.P.C .and Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act.

PRE_RELIED : This Court dealt with a statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. subsequent to death of the victim.

PRE_RELIED : In Para 20 to 24, following has been held:- "20.

PRE_RELIED : While keeping the above prescription in mind, when we test the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant in the case on hand at the time when Section 161 CrPC statement of the deceased was recorded, the offence registered was under Section 326 IPC having regard to the grievous injuries sus- tained by the victim.

PRE_RELIED : PW 4 was not contemplat- ing to record the dying declaration of the victim inasmuch as the victim was seriously injured and immediately needed medical aid.

PRE_RELIED : Before sending him to the hospital for proper treatment PW 4 thought it fit to get the ver- sion about the occurrence recorded from the victim himself that had taken place and that is how Exhibit Ka-2 came to be recorded.

PRE_RELIED : Un- doubtedly, the statement was recorded as one under Section 161 CrPC.

PRE_RELIED : Subsequent development resulted in the death of the victim on the next day and the law empowered the prosecution to rely on the said statement by treating it as a dying declaration

PRE_RELIED : , the question for con- sideration is whether the submission put forth on behalf of the respondent counsel merits ac- ceptance.

PRE_RELIED : The above statement of law would re- sult in a position that a purported recorded statement under Section 161 of a victim having regard to the subsequent event of the death of the person making the statement who was a vic- tim would enable the prosecuting authority to rely upon the said statement having regard to the nature and content of the said statement as one of dying declaration as deeming it and falling under Section 32(1) of Evidence Act and thereby commend all the credence that would be applicable to a dying declaration recorded and claimed as such."
 12.

PRE_RELIED : It is relevant to refer to judgment of this Court in Najjam Faraghi @ Nijjam Faruqui Vs. State of West Bengal, (1998) 2 SCC 45.

PRE_RELIED : In the above case, the kerosene oil was poured on the victim and she was put on fire on 13.06.1985.

PRE_RELIED : She lived for about a month and died on 31.07.1985.

PRE_RELIED : This Court referring to Section 32(1) held that mere fact that victim died long after making the dying declaration, the statement does not looses its value.

PRE_RELIED : In Para 9, following has been held:- "9.

PRE_RELIED : There is no merit in the contention that the appellant's wife died long after making the dying declarations and therefore those statements have no value.

PRE_RELIED : The contention over- looks the express provision in Section 32 of the Evidence Act.

PRE_RELIED : The second paragraph of sub- section (1) reads as follows: "Such statements are relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when they were made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the na- ture of the proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into ques- tion."
 


Id : 1743
PRE_RELIED : In M. Pais & Sons & Anr. v. The State of Mysore, (supra), Hegde, J. as the learned judge then was in the Mysore High Court held that as the goods purchased by the petitioner in that case were not covered by any valid 'C' form, sales tax was leviable at 7 per cent, and therefore the penalty that was leviable 10-1/2 per cent of the turnover.

PRE_RELIED : The petitioner, in another case, had manufactured soap and he had included the following goods in his application for certificate of registration under section 8: coconut oil, perfumes, silicate, caustic soda, nails, colours, strappings, papers and rosin.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The Madras High Court in The State of Madras v. Prem Industrial Corporation, (supra) had occasion to consider this question and it was upon this decision that the Madras High Court in the judgment under appeal relied.

PRE_RELIED : There it was held that for an offence committed within the scope of section 10(b) of the Act by the misuse of 'C' forms, the penalty at one and a half times should be calculated on the concessional rate of tax that would have been applicable of the offence had not been committed, that is, if the 'C' forms had been properly used, and not on the basis OF the rate for sales not covered by the 'C' forms.

PRE_RELIED : The attention of the Madras High Court was drawn to the judgment of the Mysore High Court in the case of M. Pai & Sons. v. The State of Mysore, (supra).

PRE_RELIED : The Madras High Court, however, felt that the decision did not take into account the concluding words 'if the offence had not been committed' In section 10A.

PRE_RELIED : In that case before the Madras High Court, the revenue sought to revise and order of the Sales-tax Appellate Tribunal by which it modified the penalty imposed.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The question again cropped up before the Orissa High Court in Bisra Limestone Company Ltd. v. Sales Tax Officer, (supra).

PRE_RELIED : There the Orissa High Court was of the view that the question of penalty would arise only when the goods were not mentioned In the certificate of registration and purchase of the same was made on a false representation made by the purchasing dealer that these were so mentioned.

PRE_RELIED : If the normal rate had been paid for the goods, without making any false representation, no offence under section 10(b) would be committed.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The question was again considered by the Full Bench of Jammu & Kashmir High Court in the case of The assessing Authority and another v. Jammu Metal Rolling Mills, [1971] Tax Law Report 1861.

PRE_RELIED : There Jaswant Singh, J. as the learned judge then was of the Jammu & Kashmir High Court, had occasion to consider the concluding words of section 10A i.e. 'impose upon him by way of penalty a sum not exceeding one and a half times the tax which would have been levied under this Act in respect of the sale to him of the goods if the offence had not been committed' and it was interpreted as not to mean that the penalty should be calculated at one and a half times the concessional rate of tax.

PRE_RELIED : All that the aforesaid words, according to the J & K High Court, meant was that the person committing the offence specified in section 10(d) would be liable to penalty which would extend to one and a half times the tax payable by a person who purchased goods for the purpose covered by the certificate of registration or the penalty would be upto one and a half times the tax which an honest dealer would have normally to pay while purchasing the goods of similar description for similar use.

PRE_RELIED : Any other interpretation according to the said High Court, would have the effect of putting a premium on the misuse of certificate of registration by unscrupulous dealers.

PRE_RELIED : The said High Court relied on the observations of the Orissa High Court in Bisra Limestone Co. Ltd., (supra) and also the Mysore High Court's view mentioned hereinbefore.

PRE_RELIED : The J & K High Court was unable to agree with the views of the Madras High Court in The State of Madras v.
Prem Industrial Corporation (supra).

PRE_RELIED : 936 The question again came to be considered by the Kerala High Court in the case of Kottayam Electricals Private Limited v. The State of Kerala, 32 S.T.C. 535.

PRE_RELIED : mere the submission was that the courts should construe the phrase 'if the offence had not been committed' to mean 'if the assessee had not misused or misapplied the goods'.

PRE_RELIED : The argument was that if the goods were not misused or misapplied the tax payable would be at the concessional rate of 3 per cent under section 8(1)(b) of the Act and that the maximum penalty that could be imposed could only be one and a half times the tax calculated at 3 per cent on the turnover in respect of which the offence had been committed.

PRE_RELIED : After discussing the contentions and acknowledging that section 10A was not happily worded, the High Court felt that it was unable to accept the view of the Madras High Court in State of Madras v. Prem Industrial Corporation, (supra).

PRE_RELIED : The High Court was of the opinion that if the court interpreted the section to mean that such a person need pay penalty calculated only at the rate of one-and-a-half times the 'concessional rate', it would lead to absurd consequences.

PRE_RELIED : 
It accepted the views of the Orissa as well as the Mysore High Courts mentioned hereinbefore.

PRE_RELIED : 
 The Gujarat High Court had occasion to consider this question again in the case of The Gaekwar Mills Ltd. v. The State of Gujarat, 37 S.T.C. 129.

PRE_RELIED : me Gujarat High Court was of the view that the penalty which was contemplated by section 10A of the Act, was to be worked out by reference to the rate of tax provided in section 8(2) of the Act and not by reference to the concessional rate of tax provided in section 8(1) of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : The Gujarat High Court felt that the Tribunal was justified in rejecting the contention of the assessee that the maximum penalty that could be levied under section 10A was 1-1/2 times the concessional rate of tax provided in section 8(1).

PRE_RELIED : Dealing with the several authorities noted hereinbefore and the scheme and language of the section, the Gujarat High Court was of the opinion that to accept the contention that the true effect of the words 'if the offence had not been committed' was to presume a situation in which the undertaking given by the declaration was carried out even though in fact the same was not carried out that would not be a proper presumption because if such a presumption was raised, it would make the whole situation highly absurd.

PRE_RELIED : The absurdity would be that for the purpose of penalising the defaulter, a presumption was to be made that the defaulter was not one who had 937 Committed any default.

PRE_RELIED : The legislature could not be attributed with any such absurd intention.

PRE_RELIED : The High Court noted that while framing section 10A, the legislature had not used the expression 'as if', at the time of using the words 'if the offence had not been committed', at choice of the word 'if', instead of the expression 'as if' indicated a conditional phrase, and not a phrase prescribing a deeming fiction.

PRE_RELIED : The High Court was of the view that the interpretation canvassed by the assessee obviously introduced the concept of a fiction which treated the offender as one who had not offended.

PRE_RELIED : Section 10A was a penal provision which stipulated penalty in lieu of the prosecution.

PRE_RELIED : me High Court expressed the view that one has yet to come across a penal provision, which created a fiction that an offender was not an offender, and should, therefore, be treated as a non-offender.

PRE_RELIED : Obviously, by such a fiction, the very object of the penal provision in question was frustrated and, therefore, the legislature could never have intended that by the creation of the above- referred fiction, the very object of introducing the penal clause contained in section 10A of the Act should have been destroyed.

PRE_RELIED : The truth of the matter, according to the High Court, was that the use of the word "if" simpliciter, was meant to indicate a condition, the condition being that at the time of assessing the penalty, that situation should be visualised wherein there was no scope of committing any offence.

PRE_RELIED : Such a situation could arise only if the tax liability fell within the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 8 of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : The scheme of the section showed that concessional rates contemplated by sub-section (1) thereof would be available only with reference to those goods which were covered by the declaration of form 'C'.

PRE_RELIED : This was clear in the scheme of the section.

PRE_RELIED : Further the High Court noted that if the contention canvassed by the assessee was accepted, then the person who committed default In carrying out his solemn undertaking contemplated by form 'C', would be in a better position than the assessee, who honestly paid the tax under sub-section (2) of section 8 without giving any undertaking contemplated by form 'C ' .

PRE_RELIED : In the case of Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Madurai Division, Madurai v. Kodaikanal Motor & ion Private Limited, 31 S.T.C. 1 the Madras High Court agreed with the view of Veeraswami, C.J. in State of Madras v. Prem Industrial M Corporation, (supra).
938

PRE_RELIED : The section as it stood at the relevant time permitted imposition on dealer by way of penalty of a sum not exceeding one-and-a-half times the tax which would have been levied under this Act in respect of the sale of goods to him 'if the offence had not been committed'.

PRE_RELIED : The section as it reads today after amendment in 1973 permits imposition by way of penalty of a sum not exceeding one-and-a-half times the tax which would have been levied under sub-section (2) of section 8.

PRE_RELIED : Sub-section (2) of section 8 deals with tax in the course of inter-State sales.

PRE_RELIED : 
 Lord Denning, in Seaford Court Estates v. Asher, [1949] 2 All E.R. 155 at 164 said thus : "....

PRE_RELIED : When a defect appears a Judge cannot simply fold his hands and blame the draftsman.

PRE_RELIED : He must set to work on the constructive task of finding the intention of Parliament......... and then he must supplement the written word so as to give 'force and life' to the intention of the legislature.......

PRE_RELIED : A Judge should ask himself the question how, if the makers of the Act had themselves come across this ruck in the texture of it, they would have straightened it out?

PRE_RELIED : He must then do as they would have done.

PRE_RELIED : A Judge must not alter the material of which the Act is woven, but he can and should iron out the creases."
         

PRE_RELIED : The courts must always seek to find out the intention of the legislature.

PRE_RELIED : Though the courts must find out the intention of the statute from the language used, but language more often than not is an imperfect instrument of expression of human thought.

PRE_RELIED : As Lord Denning said it would be idle to expect every statutory provision to be drafted with divine prescience and perfect clarity.

PRE_RELIED : As judge Learned Hand said, we must not make a fortress out of dictionary but remember that statutes must have some purpose or object, whose imaginative discovery is judicial craftsmanship.

PRE_RELIED : We need not always cling to literalness and should seek to endeavor to avoid an unjust or absurd result.

PRE_RELIED : We should not make a mockery of legislation.

PRE_RELIED : To make sense out of an unhappily worded provision, where the purpose is apparent to the judicial eye 'some' violence to language is permissible.


Id : 1742

Id : 1740

Id : 1739
PRE_RELIED : At this stage, this court relies upon decisions reported in ILR 2009 KAR 2331 (B. Indramma V/s Sri.
Eshwar), wherein the Hon'ble court held as follows: "When the very factum of delivery of the cheque in question by the accused to the complainant and its receipt by the complainant from the accused itself is seriously disputed by the accused, his admission in his evidence that the cheque in question bears his signature would not be sufficient proof of the fact that he delivered the said cheque to the complainant and the latte `received it from the former' so as to raise the presumption under Section 139 of the N.I. Act."

PRE_RELIED : 
 17. In another decision reported in 2012 (1) DCR 385 (Santhi V/s Mary Sherly), wherein the Hon'ble court held as follows: "On consideration of the various aspects and provisions of the Act, I am of view that the contention raised by an accused in a prosecution under Section 138 of the Act that he issued a blank signed cheque will not amount to admission of execution of cheque.

PRE_RELIED : A signed blank cheque leaf is very often referred to as a blank "cheque", but, strictly speaking, it is not a "cheque" as defined under the Act.

PRE_RELIED : It can be treated only as a "cheque leaf" containing admitted signature of accused.

PRE_RELIED :  The admission of signature in a cheque leaf along will not constitute admission of execution of the cheque."
 

PRE_RELIED : The principles of law laid down in the above decisions are aptly applicable to the facts of this case.

PRE_RELIED : Therefore, the above decisions are not helpful to the complainant.

PRE_RELIED : 20. As per the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India reported in (2008) 2 Supreme Court Cases (Criminal) 166 (Krishna Janardhan Bhat V/s Dattatraya G.
 Hegde) and 2010 AIR SCW 2946 (Rangappa V/s Mohan) and also in the decisions relied by the learned counsel for the accused reported in 2010 (2) Kar.L.J. 284 (B. Girish V/s S.
Ramaiah), 2013 (3) KCCR 1940 (Smt. Lakshmi Subramanya v/s B.V. Nagesh

PRE_RELIED : ), it was held that the standard of evidence to be led by the accused is preponderance of probabilities and not proof beyond reasonable doubt.

PRE_RELIED : On the contrary, for the complaint he should prove his case beyond all reasonable doubt.

PRE_RELIED : In other decisions reported in 2010(1) DCR 231 (N.Chiraj Travels (Pvt) Ltd. V/s Ashwani Kumar and another) and 2011 (1) DCR 254 (Mahendra Gulabchind Kohar V/s Cakharam Ramdas Patil) the Hon'ble Delhi and Bombay High courts having relied upon the decisions of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India referred supra, held that the presumption under Section 139 of N.I. Act is rebutable and the accused can prove the non- existence of any debt or liability by raising probable defence or by demolishing or discrediting the case of complainant and it is not necessary for the accused to prove his defence beyond all reasonable doubt.

PRE_RELIED : Further, this court relies upon a decision reported in 2011(3) Crimes 158 (Bom) (Sriniwas Ramdas Siwerwat V/s Shantaram Pandurang Deotale) wherein the Hon'ble Court held at page-13 as follows: "The statutory presumptions in favour of the complainant are not by themselves evidence but only make out the prima-facie case in favour of the complainant.

PRE_RELIED : They can exist, live and survive the contrary evidence is proved by the accused sufficient enough to believe that the cheques in question were not issued by the accused for any consideration / debt or liability.

PRE_RELIED : It is open for the accused to rebut the statutory presumption by proving that the cheques were not issued for any consideration or that there was no any debt or liability to be discharged by the accused.

PRE_RELIED : The accused can succeed upon proof of preponderance of probabilities."

PRE_RELIED : 
 Thus the complainant has failed to discharge the initial burden so as to attract the necessary ingredients of S.138 of the N.I. Act.
 21.

PRE_RELIED : In another decision reported in: AIR 2007 NOC 2612 A.P.(G. Veeresham V/s Shivashankar and Another) the Hon'ble Court has held as under: "Negotiable Instruments Act (26 of 1881), S.138 Dishonour of cheque  Presumptions available to complainant under S.118 and S.139 of Act- Rebuttal of cheque in question was allegedly issued by accused to discharge hand loan taken from complainant.

PRE_RELIED : However, no material placed on record by complainant to prove alleged lending of hand loan said fact is sufficient to infer that accused is liable to rebut presumptions available in favour of complainant under sections 118 and 139 of Act, Order acquitting accused for offence under S.138, proper".
 

PRE_RELIED : In a decision reported in AIR 2006 Supreme Court 3366 (M.S.Narayana Menon alias Mani V/s State of Kerala & Anr.), the Hon'ble Apex court held that once the accused discharges the initial burden placed on him the burden of proof would revert back to the prosecution.

PRE_RELIED : In this case on hand also, the accused has proved in all probability that she is not liable to pay Ex.P1-cheque amount of Rs. 85,000/- and it is not legally recoverable debt.

PRE_RELIED : So, the burden is on the complainant to prove strictly with cogent and believable evidence that the accused has borrowed the cheque amount and she is legally liable to pay the same.


Id : 1738

Id : 1788
PRE_RELIED : 
 21.     The decision of Ravi Kumar (Supra) deals with unusual and unexplained delay in the filing of the FIR.

PRE_RELIED : The learned Lordship’s had observed further that in the event where ocular evidence is cogent and credible, medical evidence to the contrary cannot corrode the evidentiary value of the former.

PRE_RELIED : 
 22.     In Dalbir Singh (Supra), the Hon’ble Apex Court propounded that the prosecution witnesses can identify a person with whom he may be fairly acquainted with or from his voice, gait, features etc.


Id : 1787

Id : 1786

Id : 1785

Id : 1784
PRE_RELIED : 
 19. In COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX vs SHELLY PRODUCTS AND ANOTHER reported in 2003(261) ITR 367 referred to supra, it has been opined by their Lorships that when the Act enjoins upon the assessee a duty to file return of income disclosing his true income and on the basis of such return of income, if assessment is made, it would not be permissible for the assessee to contend at a later point of time that such return of income filed voluntarily by declaring income thereon and tax paid thereon has to be ignored by the assessing officer and refund has to be made.


Id : 1781

Id : 1779

Id : 1762
PRE_RELIED : It is not necessary to repapitulate all those decisions except stating the essential ingredients as noticed by Pandian, J.
in the case reported as The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Dr.
Ravindra Prakesh J. in the case 2 SC 114 at 121, to prove quilt of an accused person by circumstantial evidence.

PRE_RELIED : They are:- (1) The circumstance from which tile conclusion is drawn should be fully proved; (2) the circumstances should he conclusive in nature; 888 (3)all the facts so established should he consistent only with the hypothesis of guilt and inconsistent with innocence: (4)the circumstances should. to a moral certainty, exclude the possibility of guilt of any person other than the accused."


Id : 1756
PRE_RELIED : On the other hand, the judgment of Delhi High Court in ANAND AND ANAND v/s COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX is squarely applicable to the facts of the present case.

PRE_RELIED : In the said case, the court was dealing with the legal services rendered by the Firm to a foreign company.

PRE_RELIED : The Delhi High Court after examining Section 80-O and also the clarification issued by the CBDT held that the assessee is not entitled for any deduction under Section 80-O of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : Relevant Paragraph 7 of the said judgment reads as under: 7.

PRE_RELIED : There is, in our opinion, no merits in the contention urged by Mr.Vohra.

PRE_RELIED : The legislative intent behind the provision of s.80-O is much too clear from Expln. (iii) to the same to need any detailed exercise involving interpretation of that provision.

PRE_RELIED : The Explanation makes it abundantly clear that a deduction under s.80- O is not allowable if the foreign receipts are relatable to services rendered in India.

PRE_RELIED : A professional's service can be rendered within India as much as it can be rendered from India.

PRE_RELIED : It would depend upon the nature of the service and not on whether the provider and the recipient of the service are located in two different countries.

PRE_RELIED : For instance, in cases where a professional offers his professional advice to a client who is stationed outside India, the service can be said to be rendered from India because it is only the rendition of advice from the professional to the recipient that is flowing outside the country.

PRE_RELIED : The flow of technical or professional expertise and knowledge of an expert located in India to a recipient outside India would doubtless constitute service rendered from India.

PRE_RELIED : At the same time, the service rendered by the expert may be limited to his advice or opinion on a subject.

PRE_RELIED : It may at times be accompanied by the experts doing various other acts within or outside the country.

PRE_RELIED : If the service is limited to advice with or without acts to be performed outside the country, payments received in foreign exchange would qualify for deduction.

PRE_RELIED : 
        That may not be so in cases where a professional, as in the case of the appellant before us, offers its professional services in Courts within the country and receives payment for rendition of such services.

PRE_RELIED : In such a situation, what the client gets is services of the professional rendered in India in relation to a matter which is pending in the Courts here.

PRE_RELIED : The fact that the client who eventually benefits from such service in India is stationed outside the country is not the sole criterion.

PRE_RELIED : 
        Payments received by any such professional for such services would not, therefore, qualify for deduction under s.80-O.
 13.


Id : 1754

Id : 1752
PRE_RELIED : 
 22. In Postmaster General v. Living Media India Ltd. (2012) 3 SCC 563, the Supreme Court has deprecated the casual attitude of government departments in taking steps to file appeals within reasonable time in the following words: "26. In spite of affording another opportunity to file better affidavit by placing adequate material, neither the Department nor the person in-charge has filed any explanation for not applying the certified copy within the prescribed period.

PRE_RELIED : Accordingly, the appeals are liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay.” 23.

PRE_RELIED : In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Amar Nath Yadav (2014) 2 SCC 422 while reiterating the above decision, the Supreme Court declined to condone the delay of 481 days in the State filing a special leave petition against the judgment of the High Court of Allahabad.


Id : 1749

Id : 1748
PRE_RELIED : 
 8. Later, another bench of two Judges of this Court in Tofan Singh v.
 State of Tamil Nadu3 was of the view that the matter required reconsideration and therefore, directed that the matter be placed before a larger bench.

PRE_RELIED : It was observed in Tofan Singh (supra) as under: "40.

PRE_RELIED : In our view the aforesaid discussion necessitates a re-look into the ratio of Kanhaiyalal case.

PRE_RELIED : It is more so when this Court has already doubted the dicta in Kanhaiyalal in Nirmal Singh Pehlwan4 wherein after noticing both Kanhaiyalal as well as Noor Aga5, this Court observed thus: (Nirmal Singh Pehlwan case, SCC p. 302, para 15) "15.

PRE_RELIED : We also see that the Division Bench in Kanhaiyalal case had not examined the principles and the concepts underlying Section 25 of the Evidence Act, 1872 vis--vis Section 108 of the Customs Act and the powers of a Customs Officer who could investigate and bring for trial an accused in a narcotic matter.

PRE_RELIED : The said case relied exclusively on the judgment in Raj Kumar case.

PRE_RELIED : The latest judgment in point of time is Noor Aga case which has dealt very elaborately with this matter.

PRE_RELIED : We thus feel it would be proper for us to follow the ratio of the judgment in Noor Aga case particularly as the provisions of Section 50 of the Act which are mandatory have also not been complied with."
 3 (2013) 16 SCC 31 4 (2011) 12 SCC 298 5 (2008) 16 SCC 417 41.

PRE_RELIED : 
 11. In Kashmira Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh7, this Court relied upon the decision of the Privy Council in Bhuboni Sahu v. The King8 and laid down as under: "Gurubachan's confession has played an important part in implicating the appellant, and the question at once arises, how far and in what way the confession of an accused person can be used against a co-accused?

PRE_RELIED : It is evident that it is not evidence in the ordinary sense of the term because, as the Privy Council say in Bhuboni Sahu v. The King "It does not indeed come within the definition of" 'evidence' contained in section 3 of the Evidence Act., It is not required to be given on oath, nor in the presence of the accused, and it cannot be tested by cross- examination."

PRE_RELIED : Their Lordships also point out that it is "obviously evidence of a very weak type.........

PRE_RELIED : It is a much weaker type of evidence than the evidence of an approver, which is not subject to any of those infirmities."
 

PRE_RELIED : They stated in addition that such a confession cannot be made tile foundation of a conviction and can only be used in "support of other evidence."

PRE_RELIED : 
 7 (1952) SCR 526 8 (1949) 76 Indian Appeal 147 at 155 In our opinion, the matter was put succinctly by Sir 'Lawrence Jenkins in Emperor v. Lalit Mohan Chuckerbutty9 where he said that such a confession can only be used to "lend assurance to other evidence against a co-accused "or, to put it in another way, as Reilly J. did in In re Periyaswami Moopan10 "the provision goes no further than this--where there is evidence against the co-accused sufficient, if believed, to support his conviction, then the kind of confession de- scribed in section 30 may be thrown into the scale as an additional reason for believing that evidence."

PRE_RELIED : In such an event the judge may call in aid the confession and use it to lend assurance to the other evidence and thus fortify himself in believing what without the aid of the confession he would not be prepared to accept."
 12.

PRE_RELIED : The law laid down in Kashmira Singh (supra) was approved by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Hari Charan Kurmi and Jogia Hajam v. State of Bihar11 wherein it was observed: "As we have already indicated, this question has been considered on several occasions by judicial decisions and it has been consistently held that a confession cannot be treated as evidence which is substantive evidence against a co-accused person.

PRE_RELIED : In dealing with a criminal case where the prosecution relies upon the confession of one accused person against another accused person, 9 [1911] I.L.R. 38 CAl. 559 at 588 10 [1931] I.L.R. 54 Mad. 75 at 77.
11 (1964) 6 SCR 623 at 631-633 the proper approach to adopt is to consider the other evidence against such an accused person, and if the said evidence appears to be satisfactory and the court is inclined to hold that the said evidence may sustain the charge framed against the said accused person, the court turns to the confession with a view to assure itself that the conclusion which it is inclined to draw from the other evidence is right.

PRE_RELIED : As was observed by Sir Lawrence Jenkins in Emperor v. Lalit Mohan Chuckerburty a confession can only be used to "lend assurance to other evidence against a co-accused".

PRE_RELIED : In re Periyaswami Moopan Reilly. J., observed that the provision of Section 30 goes not further than this: "where there is evidence against the co-accused sufficient, if believed, to support his conviction, then the kind of confession described in Section 30 may be thrown into the scale as an additional reason for believing that evidence".

PRE_RELIED : In Bhuboni Sahu v. King the Privy Council has expressed the same view.

PRE_RELIED : Sir John Beaumont who spoke for the Board, observed that "a confession of a co-accused is obviously evidence of a very weak type.

PRE_RELIED : The same view has been expressed by this Court in Kashmira Singh v.
        State of Madhya Pradesh where the decision of the Privy Council in Bhuboni Sahu case has been cited with approval."
 13.


Id : 1747
PRE_RELIED : 
 13.  Insofar as the view taken by the learned Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in ECO Products (I) P. Ltd.
 (supra) is concerned, paragraphs 57, 58 and 59 read as under : "57.

PRE_RELIED : Now the submission of Sri Kesarwani that right of appeal under Section 35-G of the Act being statutory remedy and a substantive right, should be interpreted liberally while that portion of this Section which excludes the right of appeal to the High Court has to be construed strictly and in a restrictive sense is to be considered.

PRE_RELIED : It is useful to refer to paragraph 44 of the judgment of the Karnataka High Court in the case of Commissioner of Central Excise, Mangalore Vs. Mangalore Refineries & Petrochemicals Ltd.
(supra) where the Karnataka High Court has noticed the intention behind the bifurcation of jurisdiction between the Apex Court and the High Court.

PRE_RELIED : Following was laid down by the Karnataka High Court in paragraph 44, which is as under : "44.

PRE_RELIED : The intention behind this bifurcation of jurisdiction between the Apex Court and the High Court seems to be that more often than not, any decision on these aforesaid aspects nor only affects the interest of the manufacturers who are parties thereto, but also to the manufacturers of those products throughout the country.

PRE_RELIED : In a country governed by Parliamentary legislation because of the territorial bifurcation in forming states and because of the divergent opinion which is possible, the excise duty payable would vary from place to place.

PRE_RELIED : In order to bring uniformity in the levy of excise duty throughout the country and consequently to see that the country's finance is not affected, the Parliament has vested the jurisdiction to decide the disputes with the Apex Court.

PRE_RELIED : Therefore, we see a duty policy underlining this bifurcation of the jurisdiction between the Apex Court and the High Courts.

PRE_RELIED : All other matters other than what is set out above, which relates to the individual manufacturers and all disputes based on assessment orders which have attained finality, such as the benefits to which they are entitled to, refunds, duty drawbacks, rebates, etc., which relate to a particular manufacturer falls within the jurisdiction of the High Courts."

PRE_RELIED : 
 (( 12 )) 59.

PRE_RELIED : In view of the foregoing discussions, we are of the view that since the question raised in the appeal relates to eligibility of the goods manufactured by the assessee for exemption under Notification No.1/93-C.E., dated 28.2.1993 and goods were manufactured without payment of duty and no assessment had taken place, the proceedings initiated under Section 11-A were for determination of duty liability in which the eligibility of the said goods for exemption was disputed.

PRE_RELIED : The question of exemption is directly and proximately related to the rate of duty for the purposes of assessment of excise duty payable by the respondent.

PRE_RELIED : The appeal on the said question is clearly excluded under Section 35-G and can be filed by the revenue before the Apex Court under Section 35-L of the Act.

PRE_RELIED : Thus, the preliminary objection of the respondent regarding maintainability of appeal is upheld and Central Excise Appeal Defective No.402 of 2005 is held not maintainable under Section 35-G of the Act."


Id : 1745
PRE_RELIED : Likewise, if the court of fact bases its decision partly on conjectures, surmises and suspicions and partly on evidence, in such a situation an issue of law arises [see Dhirajlal Girdharlal v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay(1)

PRE_RELIED : In the case of Edwards (Inspector of Taxes) v. Bairstow and Another(3), the House of Lords dealt with this aspect of the matter.

PRE_RELIED : 
The above observations were relied upon by Bhagwati J.
(speaking for the majority) in the case of Mehta Parikh & Co. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay(1).

PRE_RELIED : The following proposition was laid down in that case : "It follows, therefore, that facts proved or admitted may provide evidence to support further conclusions to be deduced from them, which conclusions may themselves be conclusions of fact and such inferences from facts proved or admitted could be matters of law.

PRE_RELIED : The Court would be entitled to intervene if it appears that the fact finding authority has acted without any evidence or upon a view of the facts, which could not reasonably be entertained or the facts found are such that no person acting judicially and properly instructed as to the relevant law would have come to the determination in question."


Id : 1744

Id : 1744

Id : 1733

Id : 1730
PRE_RELIED : In Gopal Sah v. State of Bihar 2008(17) SCC 128, this court while dealing with extra judicial confession held that extra judicial confession is, on the face of it, a weak evidence and the Court is reluctant, in the absence of a chain of cogent circumstances, to rely on it, for the purpose of recording a conviction.

PRE_RELIED : 
 14. The classic enunciation of law pertaining to circumstantial evidence, its relevance and decisiveness, as a proof of charge of a criminal offence, is amongst others traceable decision of the Court in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda Vs. State of Maharashtra 1984(4) SCC 116.

PRE_RELIED : The relevant excerpts from para 153 of the decision is assuredly apposite: "153.

PRE_RELIED : A close analysis of this decision would show that the following conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an accused can be said to be fully established: (1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.

PRE_RELIED : 
 It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned "must or should" and not "may be" established.

PRE_RELIED : There is not only a grammatical but a legal distinction between "may be proved" and "must be or should be proved" as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade & Anr. Vs. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 where the observations were made: "Certainly, it is a primary principle that accused must be the                   and  not merely may be guilty before a court can convict and the mental distance between `may be' and `must be' is long and divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions."

PRE_RELIED : 
 (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty, (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency, (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have been done by the accused."

PRE_RELIED : 
 15. It has further been considered by this Court in Sujit Biswas Vs. State of Assam 2013(12) SCC 406 and Raja alias Rajinder Vs. State of Haryana 2015(11) SCC 43.


Id : 1729

Id : 1725
PRE_RELIED : BENCH:
AHMAD SAGHIR S. (J)
BENCH:
AHMAD SAGHIR S. (J)
KULDIP SINGH (J)

CITATION:                1996 SCC (1) 490
 1996 AIR 922            1995 SCALE (7)228
 JT 1995 (9) 509

ACT:

HEADNOTE:

JUDGMENT

PRE_RELIED : See : Rudul Sah vs. State of Bihar : AIR 1983 SC 1086; Peoples' Union for Democratic Rights (through its Secretary & Anr.) vs. Police Commissioner, Delhi Police HQs.
& Anr. : (1989) 4 SCC 730.
 

PRE_RELIED : (See : Francis Coralie Mullin vs. The Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi & Ors., AIR 1981 SC 746; State of Maharashtra vs. Chandrabhan, AIR 1983 SC 803; Olga Tellis & Ors. vs. Bombay Municipal Corporation & Ors., AIR 1986 SC 180; and Delhi Transport Corporation vs. D.T.C.
Mazdoor Congress & Ors., AIR 1991 SC 101).

PRE_RELIED : 
 In State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Raghubir Singh, 1993(2) SCC 622, this Court observed as under :- "There is no legal compulsion to look for corroboration of the evidence of the prosecutrix before recording an order of conviction.

PRE_RELIED : Evidence has to be weighed and not counted.

PRE_RELIED : Conviction can be recorded on the sole testimony of the prosecutrix, if her evidence inspires confidence and there is absence of circumstances which militate her veracity.

PRE_RELIED : In the present case the evidence of the prosecutrix is found to be reliable and trustworthy.

PRE_RELIED : No corroboration was required to be looked for, though enough was available on the record.

PRE_RELIED : The medical evidence provided sufficient corroboration."

PRE_RELIED : In State of Karnataka vs. Mahabaleshwar Gourya Naik, AIR 1992 SC 2043 = 1992 Suppl. (3) SCC 179, the Court went to the extent of laying down that even if the victim of rape is not available to give evidence on account of her having committed suicide, the prosecution case cannot be thrown away over board.

PRE_RELIED : In such a case, the non-availability of the victim will not be fatal and the Court can record a conviction on the basis of the available evidence brought on record by the prosecution.

PRE_RELIED : 
 We may, at this stage, refer to a decision of this Court in Delhi Domestic Working Women's Forum vs. Union of India, 1995 (1) SCC 14, in which Court observed as under :- "It is rather unfortunate that in recent times, there has been an increase in violence against women causing serious concern.

PRE_RELIED : Rape does indeed pose a series of problems for the criminal justice system.

PRE_RELIED : There are cries for harshest penalties, but often times such crimes eclipse the real plight of the victim.

PRE_RELIED : 
 Rape is an experience which shakes the foundations of the lives of the victims.

PRE_RELIED : 
 For many, its effect is a long-term one, impairing their capacity for personal relationships, altering their behaviour values and generating and less fears.

PRE_RELIED : In addition to the trauma of the rape itself, victims have had to suffer further agony during legal proceedings."


Id : 1724
PRE_RELIED : The Revenue relied on the celebrated test laid down by Lord Cave L.C. in British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd. v. Atherson where the learned Law Lord stated "When an expenditure is made, not only once and for all, but with a view to bringing into existence an asset or an advantage for the enduring benefit of a trade, there is very good reason (in the absence of special circumstances leading to an opposite conclusion) for treating such an expenditure as properly attributable not to revenue but to capital".

PRE_RELIED : It was also pointed out by this Court in Empire Jute Co. Ltd. v.
528 C.I.T. that "there may be cases where expenditure, even if incurred for obtaining advantage of enduring benefit, may, nonetheless, be on revenue account and the test of enduring benefit may break down.

PRE_RELIED : 
529 It was pointed out by Lord Radcliffe in commissioner of Taxes v. Nothanga Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd. (supra) that "in considering allocation of expenditure between the capital and income accounts, it is almost unavoidable to argue from analogy."

PRE_RELIED : 
 We must also refer to the decision of this Court in Travancore-Cochin Chemicals Ltd. v. C.I.T. (Supra) on which strong reliance was placed on behalf of the Revenue.


Id : 1717

Id : 1715
PRE_RELIED : In the same decision, the Court also took note of the following observations made by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Iqbal Singh Marwah v. Meenakshi Marwah, (2005) 4 SCC 370 in relation to the scope of Section 340 of the CrPC: "23.


Id : 1714
PRE_RELIED : A similar argument was raised before this Court in C. 1. Emden v. State of Uttar Pradesh(1).

PRE_RELIED : Dealing with it this Court has pointed out that what the prosecution has to prove is that the accused person has received "gratification other than legal remuneration"
 and that when it is shown that he has received a certain sum of money which was not a legal remuneration, then the condition prescribed by this section is satisfied.

PRE_RELIED : This Court then proceeded to observe: "If the word "gratification' is construed to mean money paid by way of a bribe then it would be futile or superfluous to prescribe for the raising of the presumption.

PRE_RELIED : 
 In this connection a reference was made to s.  165 of the Code and it was observed: (1) (1960) 2 S.C.R. 592.
 494 "It cannot be suggested that the relevant clause in s. 4 (1) which deals with the acceptance of any valuable things hold be interpreted to impose upon the prosecution an obligation to prove not only that the valuable thing has been received by the accused but that it has been received by him without consideration or for a consideration which he knows to be inadequate.

PRE_RELIED : 
How the burden which has shifted to the accused under s.
4(1) of the prevention of Corruption Act is to be discharged has been considered by this Court in State of Madras v. A.
Vaidyanatha Iyer(1) where it has been observed : "Therefore, where it is proved that a gratification has been accepted, then the presumption shall at once arise under the section.

PRE_RELIED : It introduces an exception to the general rule as to the burden of proof in criminal cases and shifts the onus on to the accused.

PRE_RELIED : 
It is a presumption of law and therefore it is obligatory on the court to raise this presumption (1) [1958] S. C. R. 580.
 499 in every case brought under s. 4 of the Prevention of Corruption Act because unlike the case of presumption of fact, presumptions of law constitute a branch of jurisprudence."

PRE_RELIED : 
These observations were made by this Court while dealing with an appeal against an order of the Madras High Court setting aside the conviction of an accused person under s.
161, I.P.C.

PRE_RELIED : In that case the accused, an Income-tax Officer, was alleged to have received a sum of Rs. 1,000 as bribe from an assessee whose case was pending before him.


Id : 1713
PRE_RELIED : The rationale behind the defence under Section 84 IPC was explained by the Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Shera Ram @ Vishnu Datta (2012) 1 SCC 602 in the following words: "To commit a criminal offence, mens rea is generally taken to be an essential element of crime.

PRE_RELIED : It is said furiosi nulla voluntus est.

PRE_RELIED : In Hari Singh Gond v. State of Madhya Pradesh (2008) 16 SCC 109 the Supreme Court observed: "Section 84 lays down the legal test of responsibility in cases of alleged unsoundness of mind.

PRE_RELIED : There is no definition of 'unsoundness of mind' in IPC.

PRE_RELIED : A court is concerned with legal insanity, and not with medical insanity."
 28.

PRE_RELIED : In Surendra Mishra v. State of Jharkhand (2011) 11 SCC 495, it was pointed out that "every person who is suffering from mental disease is not ipso facto        exempted from criminal liability."

PRE_RELIED : in Shrikant Anandrao Bhosale v. State of Maharashtra (2002) 7 SCC 748, which was a case where the defense under Section 84 IPC on the ground of paranoid schizophrenia was accepted, the Supreme Court explained that "it is the totality of the circumstances seen in the light of the evidence on record"
which would prove that the Appellant in that case was suffering from the said condition.

PRE_RELIED : It was added: "The unsoundness of mind before and after the incident is a relevant fact."

PRE_RELIED : 
 41. In Sidhapal Kamala Yadav v. State of Maharashtra (2009) 1 SCC 124, the Supreme Court quoted from the judgment of the High Court, under appeal before it where, inter alia, while discussing Section 84 IPC, it was held as under: “The onus of providing unsoundness of mind is on the accused.
       

PRE_RELIED : 
 43. In Radhey Shyam v. State ILR 2010 Supp. (2) Delhi 475, this Court reflected on this aspect by observing as under: “38.

PRE_RELIED : It would be virtually impossible to lead direct evidence of what was the exact mental condition of the accused at the time of the commission of the crime.

PRE_RELIED : The report notes that he “requires regular treatment but can be managed on outpatient basis.” „Dysthymia‟ is defined as „persistent depressive disorder‟.
 53.

PRE_RELIED : In State of Rajasthan v. Shera Ram @ Vishnu Datta (supra) the Supreme Court affirmed a judgment dated 21st February, 2004 of the Rajasthan High Court acquitting the Respondent therein “primarily on the ground that at the time of incident, he was a person of unsound mind within the meaning of Section 84 IPC.”


Id : 1763
PRE_RELIED : 
To quote the illustration given by Rowlatt J. in B. IV.

PRE_RELIED : 
Noble Limited v. Mitchell,(1) in the ordinary case a payment to get rid of a servant when it is not expedient to keep him in the interest of trade would be a deductible expenditure.

PRE_RELIED : 
A payment made to remove the possibility of a recurring disadvantage cannot be considered as a payment made to acquire an enduring advantage.

PRE_RELIED : 
In Noble's case (supra), Rowlatt J. had to examine the ques- tion whether the item of expenditure concerned in that case was a revenue expenditure.

PRE_RELIED : Briefly stated the facts-of that case were : 'Under its Articles of Association, the management of a company of Insurance brokers registered in England was vested in its Board of Directors in London, with powers of delegation.

PRE_RELIED : One of the Directors was appointed Resident Director in France.

PRE_RELIED : He conducted the French business of the Company from an office in Paris under a power of attorney from the Company.

PRE_RELIED : The Company ,claimed as a deduction from its profits for income-tax purposes a sum of pound 19,200 payable (by instalments) to a retiring Director in the following circumstances : The Original Directors were ap- (1) 11 Tax Cas 372.
521 pointed for life so long as they held a qualifying number of shares, Subject.

PRE_RELIED : Lo dismissal forthwith for neglect or misconduct towards the Company.

PRE_RELIED : A Director so dismissed was only entitled to receive his salary then due and could be required to sell his shares to the under Directors at par.

PRE_RELIED : 
He would also have to surrender for cancellation certain notes issued by the, Company entitling him to participate in surplus profits.

PRE_RELIED : Circumstances arose in 1920 and 1921 in which the Company might possibly have been justified in -dismissing one of the Directors, but to avoid publicity injurious to the Company's reputation, it entered into negotiation with the Director for his retirement.

PRE_RELIED : He claimed pound 50,000 as compensation; but a compromise was arrived at and embodied in an agreement dated the 30th December, 1921 by which he agreed to retire from the Company, to transfer his 300 pound 1 shares to the, other Directors at par value (they were then worth considerably more) and to surrender his participating notes.

PRE_RELIED : The Company agreed to pay him pound 19,200 and the Directors to pay him pound 300 (as consideration for his shares) making together pound 19,500 (payable in five annual instalments) which he agreed to accept in full satisfaction of all claims against the Company or the Directors.

PRE_RELIED : The question was whether the payment of pound 19,200 was a deductible expenditure.

PRE_RELIED : The Special Commissioners decided against the Company but the King's Bench Division as well as Court of Appeal accepted the Company's contention and held that the payment of pound 19,200 made was an admissible deduction in arriving its profits for income-tax purposes.

PRE_RELIED : In the course of his judgment Rowlatt J. sitting on the King's Bench Division relied on the observations of Lord Chancellor in Atherton v.
British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd. (1) to the effect "a sum of money expended, not of necessity and with a view to a direct and immediate benefit to the trade, but voluntarily and on the grounds of commercial expediency, and in order indirectly to facilitate the carrying on of the business, may yet be expanded wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the trade."

PRE_RELIED : 
These observations of the Lord Chancellor were again quoted with approval by Lord Hanworth M. R. when the matter was taken in appeal to the Court of Appeal.

PRE_RELIED : 
The next case which may be usefully referred is the decision in Anglo Persian Oil Co. Ltd. v. Dale.

PRE_RELIED : (2 ) Therein the assessee company by agreement made in 1910 and 1914 had appointed another limited company as its agents in Persia and the East for a period of years, upon the terms (inter alia) that the agents should be remunerated by commission at specified rates.

PRE_RELIED : With the passage of time the amounts payable to the agents by way of corn- (1) 10 T.C. P. 192.
(2) 16 Tax Cas 253.
522 mission increased far beyond the amounts originally contemplated by the Company, and, after negotiation between the parties, the agreements were cancelled in 1922, the agent company agreeing to go into voluntary liquidation and the company agreeing to pay to the agents pound 300,000-in cash.

PRE_RELIED : This sum was in fact paid and the company contended before the Special Commissioners that it was an admissible deduction in computing the Company's profits for purposes of Income-Tax and Corporation Profits Tax.

PRE_RELIED : The Special Commissioners rejected this contention and the Company appealed.

PRE_RELIED : Rowlatt J. sitting in the King's Bench Division allowed the appeal and held that the payment to the agents was an admissible deduction for the purpose of income-tax and Corporation Profits Tax.

PRE_RELIED : His decision was affirmed by the Court of Appeal.

PRE_RELIED : In the course of his judgment Rowlatt J. observed : "Now I want to see how the Commissioners have dealt with it, and what they say is that this was expenditure of a special nature to secure an enduring benefit for the Company's trade by getting rid of an onerous contract.

PRE_RELIED : In my judgment that is a finding which is perfectly inconclusive.

PRE_RELIED : It does not deal with the question, The question is not merely getting rid of an onerous contract, but an onerous contract for what ?

PRE_RELIED : If it is an onerous contract for the payment of wages or commission which are chargeable to revenue account in the plainest possible way, and if that is the onerous contract that you are getting rid of it is impossible to suggest that is a reason for saying that this is a capital expenditure unless you get rid of that onerous contract (as I pointed out just now) by erecting in its place a capital asset in the nature of-of course I am only using this as an illustrative examples labour-saving machine which gives you an asset and so dispenses with the expense of labour.

PRE_RELIED : But to say that it is a capital expenditure because it secured an enduring benefit by getting rid of an onerous contract is not to state the material thing, and it is completely inconclusive."

PRE_RELIED : 
In C. Scammell and Nephew Ltd. v. Rowles, (1) the Court of Appeal held that the expenditure incurred for the termination of a trading relationship in order to avoid losses occurring in the future through that relationship, wheth er pecuniary losses or commercial inconveniences, is just as much for the purposes of the trade as the making or the carrying into effect of a trading agreement.

PRE_RELIED : 
The case which can be said to be the nearest to the facts of the present case decided by any Indian court is that decided by the Calcutta High Court in Anglo-Persian Oil Co. (India) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax.(2) Therein money was paid by an (1) [1940] I.T.R. Suppl 41 (2) [1933] vol. I, I.T.R. 129.
523 oil company

PRE_RELIED : in a lump sum

PRE_RELIED : as compensation for loss of agency whereby the company relieved itself of future annual payments of commission chargeable to revenue account

PRE_RELIED : . The question was whether the money paid as compensation was allowable as proper deduction from the business profits of the Company.

PRE_RELIED : The court upheld the contention of the company that it was a revenue expenditure.

PRE_RELIED : Further the court observed that the principle that capital receipt spells capital expenditure or vice versa is simple but it is not necessarily sound.

PRE_RELIED : Whether a sum is received on capital or revenue account depends or may depend upon the character of the business of the recipient.

PRE_RELIED : Whether a payment is or is not in the nature of capital expenditure depends or may depend upon the character of the business of the payer and upon other factors related thereto


Id : 1753
PRE_RELIED : In this regard, one may take note of the observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Jagannivasan .vs. State of Kerala, reported at 1995 Cri.L.J.
 3229, with regard to conduct of the prosecutrix.

PRE_RELIED : Paragraph 5 of the said judgment can be reproduced as under : "5.

PRE_RELIED : We may proceed with the assumption that the sexual act did take place in the way suggested by the prosecution and that the appellant was involved in it.

PRE_RELIED : But, was it a case of consent ?

PRE_RELIED : 
     In order to determine that, we have to see the conduct of the prosecutrix.

PRE_RELIED : The peculiarity in that regard which creates doubt is that the prosecutrix kept quiet for six days and did not whisper a word about it to anyone.

PRE_RELIED : Her getting pain in her private parts six days later is unbelievable when no tenderness was found by the Doctor and no complaint of pain was made to her.

PRE_RELIED : There is evidence on the record that the appellant had been employed in Dubai and presumably had mastered a handsome income when compared to persons working in his home state.

PRE_RELIED : He was a bachelor and obviously an attractive catch for girls in his brotherhood to be bonded in matrimony.

PRE_RELIED : The fact that P.W.5, the woman who lived in the neighbourhood, was absent at the crucial time, whose room was used for the sex act, leads to the doubts that the meeting between the prosecutrix and the appellant was arranged by P.W.5 with the implicit consent of the parties.

PRE_RELIED : This P.W.5, was declared hostile by the prosecution.

PRE_RELIED : 
     Another factor of significance is that on that day there were dances organized in the village to celebrate the Onam Festival and most of the populace had gone to witness such performance.

PRE_RELIED : 
     There was thus less likelihood of their meeting being interfered with by curious onlookers.

PRE_RELIED : Thus, it cannot be ruled out that a suitable time for the meeting was chosen by the two when P.W.5, would conveniently be away and the visit of the prosecutrix and the appellant in her house would raise no suspicion.

PRE_RELIED : It is the case of the prosecution that after the sex act, the prosecutrix went to the dancing performance rather than go to her parents and inform them of the suggested crime committed on her.

PRE_RELIED : In these circumstances, we are of the view that it would be unsafe to rely on the word of the prosecutrix, given vent to after six days to the effect that she was subjected to rape or that sexual intercourse was committed without her consent.

PRE_RELIED : It would rather be safe to lean in favour of the appellant and accord him the benefit of doubt."


