Precedent Referred : 2. The conundrum in these matters revolves around the exposition of the Constitution Bench of this Court in K. Krishna Murthy (Dr.) & Ors. v. Union of India & Anr.(2010) 7 SCC 202. Relying on the dictum in the said decision, the petitioners would urge that it is no more open to the respondents to reserve more than 50 per cent (aggregate) seats in the concerned local bodies by providing reservation for Scheduled Castes for short, "the SCs"/Scheduled Tribes for short, "the STs"/Other Backward Classes for short, "the OBCs". Whereas, the respondent-State would urge that the stated decision recognises that it is permissible to reserve seats for OBCs to the extent permissible in the 1961 Act. Further, in exceptional situation, the reservation for SCs/STs/OBCs in the concerned local bodies (Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis) could exceed even 50 per cent of the total seats. This is the central issue to be dealt with in the present writ petitions.

Precedent Relied : "67. In the recent decision reported as Union of India v. Rakesh Kumar [(2010) 4 SCC 50 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 961 : (2010) 1 Scale 281] this Court has explained why it may be necessary to provide reservations in favour of the Scheduled Tribes that exceed 50% of the seats in panchayats located in the Scheduled Areas. However, such exceptional considerations cannot be invoked when we are examining the quantum of reservations in favour of backward classes for the purpose of local bodies located in general areas. In such circumstances, the vertical reservations in favour of SCs/STs/OBCs cannot exceed the upper limit of 50% when taken together. It is obvious that in order to adhere to this upper ceiling, some of the States may have to modify their legislations so as to reduce the quantum of the existing quotas in favour of OBCs."

Precedent Relied : 4. I say that the elections were held to the Zilla Parishads of five districts in Maharashtra, namely Nagpur, Washim, Akola, Dhule and Nandurbar in December 2019/January 2020, pursuant to the orders passed by this Hon'ble Court. In all the aforesaid districts, the reservation exceeded 50%. It is the contention of the Petitioners that in all the aforesaid districts the reservation could not have exceeded 50% as it was the upper limit as set out in the judgments of Indra Sawhney vs. Union of India reported in (1992) 3 SCC 217 and the judgment of K. Krushnamurthy vs. Union of India reported in (2010) 7 SCC 202. The only issue that essentially remains for consideration of this Hon'ble Court, in all these matters is whether the reservation in all the aforesaid five districts could have exceeded 50%.

Precedent Relied : 8. I submit that in the absence of explicit constitutional guidance as to the quantum of reservation in favour of backward classes in local self-government, the rule of thumb is that of 'proportionate reservation'. Admittedly, reservations in excess of 50% do exist in some exceptional cases, when it comes to the domain of political representation, which is the outcome of exceptional considerations in relation to these areas. Similarly, vertical reservations in excess of 50% are permissible in the composition of local self-government institutions located in the Fifth Schedule Areas. I submit that in the judgment of Union of India v. Rakesh Kumar reported in (2010) 4 SCC 50, this Hon'ble Court has explained why it may be necessary to provide reservations in favour of the Scheduled Tribes that exceed 50% of the seats in local self-governments located in the Scheduled Area.

