Precedent Referred : 14. Learned counsel would expatiate and submit that under the Code, the law provides for a period of 14 days for the Adjudicating Authority to decide whether an application under Section 7 should be admitted. Section 12 declares an inflexible time limit for the insolvency resolution process to be terminated. The whole purport of the provisions of the Code and the manner in which it is structured is geared to achieve a laudable object. The Code aims at improving the ranking of India in the matter of ease of doing business. It is an economic measure which is intended to transform India into a country which would attract capital and investment. The Code has indeed resulted in a transformation of attitudes of the key players, in that it has come to be perceived as a law not merely on paper but one with teeth to it. He would point out that this Court in its decision in the Pioneer's Case Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Ltd. and another v. Union of India and others(2019) 8 SCC 416 has elaborately dealt with the apprehension that allowing the home buyers like the petitioners who finance the builder's activities to invoke the CIRP process will lead to misuse of the provisions and allayed the unfounded fears. Yet the legislature has ventured to place unjustifiable clogs on the right of one category of financial creditors alone which is impermissible. The spectre of a speculative investor running riot and playing havoc has been adequately addressed by this Court. There is no worthwhile data of misuse by home buyers. He points out the judgments passed by NCLAT where the financial creditors, who are home buyers, approach the Tribunal and the cases reflect gross and inordinate delay of nearly five years justifying the approach made by the home buyers under the Code. In other words, there were genuine cases where the debtor had become insolvent and hence the home buyer had complete justification in knocking at the doors of the competent Tribunal under the Code. He took us through the reports of the Parliamentary Committee and complained that no reasons are discernible to justify the amendments. Equally, he commended for our acceptance the observations in the dissent notes and contended that they fortify the submissions.

Precedent Relied : 20. Shri Piyush Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners would submit that once the right is conferred to make an application, then it cannot come conditioned with threshold limit as is provided in the impugned provisos. Secondly, he would point out that there is manifest arbitrariness. That apart, he would also contend that there is hostile discrimination qua other corporate debtor. The builder who is a corporate debtor, in other words, is given a more favourable treatment than other corporate debtors which is afflicted with the vice of hostile discrimination. He also complained of both under and over inclusiveness in the impugned provisions. Next, learned counsel submits that the very object is discriminatory. Drawing our attention to both Chitra Sharma and others v. Union of India and others (2018) 18 SCC 575 and Pioneer (supra), he would highlight that having regard to the background in which the rights of the home buyer was recognised as being one of that of a financial creditor, the amendment is clearly impermissible. He would also submit that having regard to the stand taken by the Government in the case before this Court, in particular, Pioneer (supra), the principles of promissory estoppel will apply and prevent enactment of the impugned provisions. He would expatiate and submit that the conditions which have been imposed render the remedy illusory. He drew our attention to Order 1 Rule 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure and also took us to the explanation therein. He would submit that the proviso is not on similar lines as Order 1 Rule 8. This is for the reason that under the procedure under Order 1 Rule 8, the numerical stipulation in the impugned Provisos is not insisted upon. Once persons having same interest institute a civil suit, after following the procedure all persons having the same interest become involved and what is more would be bound by the decision. Section 12 of the Consumer Protection Act which also captures and embodies the principle of Order 1 Rule 8 ensures the protection of class interest and also protect class interest without putting stiff barriers as threshold limits as done by the impugned amendment. He pointed out that the real estate owners do not take any loan from financial institutions. They raise capital exclusively from the allottees virtually. In such circumstances, to put this threshold limit is clearly impermissible. He drew our attention to the judgment of the Court in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P. (1979) 2 SCC 409., to buttress his submission regarding availability of principles of promissory estoppel. There is manifest arbitrariness in the provisions. He complained that the RERA has not been constituted in all the States. He also made an attempt at pointing out the perception that the amendment is to confer an unmerited advantage on the builder. This he purported to do by drawing our attention to an article in a newspaper. He essentially projected this argument as a thinly disguised argument of malice against the law giver. He also sought to draw support from the judgment of this Court in Nagpur Investment Trust and others v. Vithal Rao and others (1973) 1 SCC 500. He reiterated the principle of hostile discrimination. He drew our attention to the definition of the word 'allottee' in RERA. It is here that he complained of the provision being under inclusive and over inclusive. The legislature, he points out should have waited and at best could have acted if there is impeachable and empirical evidence warranting such a drastic incursion into the vested right of the home buyer. He also highlights that in law there can only be one default. A home buyer who before the amendment could by himself set the law into motion, is now left at the mercy of similarly circumstanced persons which itself is rendered impossible by the absence of an information generating mechanism which is accessible. He would also point out that the dates of the agreements of different home buyers would be different. Depending on the dates of the agreements being different, it is incontrovertible, he points out that the date of default would be different. He would pose the question as to how in such circumstances the law could insist upon a home buyer assembling together other homebuyers and that too one hundred in number or one-tenth of the total number of allottees. Allottees are spread all over the world. It is inconceivable as to how the provision can be worked in a reasonable and fair manner.

Precedent Referred : 23. Shri Dhruv Gupta, learned Counsel appearing in W.P. (C) No.177 of 2020 complained against retrospectivity spelt out by the impugned provisions. The right which was a vested right was substantive in nature. The law could only be prospective. He draws our attention to the judgment of this Court in B.K. Educational Services (P) Ltd. v. Parag Gupta & Associates (2019) 11 SCC 633. He also lays store by the principles laid down by this Court in Swiss Ribbon Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. (2019) 4 SCC 17 and also in The Pioneer (supra).

Precedent Referred : 25. Shri A.D.N. Rao, learned Counsel would submit that a substantive right cannot be taken away by a procedural requirement. The home buyers have been conferred the substantive right to invoke the code by moving an application under Section 7. This right cannot be taken away by providing for a procedure and what is more which is impossible to attain. He drew our attention to the decision of this Court in Garikapati Veeraya v. N. Subbiah Choudhry AIR 1957 SC 540 / 1957 SCR 488. He would submit that the law as on the date of initiation should prevail and it cannot be taken away by the amendment which is made subsequently. Apparently, the learned counsel is making his submission qua the 3rd proviso inserted in Section 7(1) of the Code. He seeks to drawn support from judgment of this court in Thirumalai Chemicals Limited v. Union of India and others (2011) 6 SCC 739. He also contends that a proviso cannot override the main provision. In this regard, he relied upon the judgment of this court in Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. v. Tarun Pal Singh and others (2018) 14 SCC 161. He would in fact point out with reference to facts that the orders were reserved in the application under Section 7 in November, 2019. The proviso came to be inserted on 28th December 2019. Resultantly, when the order came to be pronounced regarding admission of the application under Section 7, the authorities stood overtaken by the amendment. All of this is for no fault of the litigant who at the time when the application was moved was governed by a different regime which did not contain the harsh and arbitrary provisions. He would also point out practical difficulty in finding out other allottees.

Precedent Referred : 26. Smt. Tasleem Ahmadi, learned Counsel would submit that an amendment as impugned in this case has the effect of setting at nought the directions and decision of this court. She would complain that an amendment has been engrafted without removing the premise on which Pioneer was decided. She drew our attention to the judgment of this Court in State of Karnataka and others v. The Karnataka Pawn Brokers Association and others (2018) 6 SCC 363 (paragraphs-16, 20, 23 and 24).

Precedent Relied : 29. Shri Rana Mukherjee, learned Senior Counsel appears in writ petition where first proviso is called in question, he represents the cause of money lenders. He drew our attention to paragraph-43 of the Pioneer (supra). He pointed out that the requirement that the applicants must be of the same class and there must be 100 of them rendered the provisions unachievable. He drew our attention to Sections 244 and 245 of the Companies Act, 2013. He pointed out that the threshold under the said Act could be relaxed whereas under the code the law giver has inflicted the requirement as an inflexible mandate. He also complained of there being no information qua the requirement of 10 percent. He drew our attention to Rule 8A. He would submit that actually Parliament had in mind the home buyer. The insertion of the 1st proviso betrays a mistaken roping in of the category of creditors represented by his clients. He sought to draw considerable support from the judgment of this Court in Vasant Ganpat Padvave (D) by LRs & Ors. v. Anant Mahadev Sawant (D) Through LRs. & Ors. 2019 (12) SCALE 572 of his compilation. He commended for our acceptance the principle that the law must be considered having regard to consequences it produces. He requested that the court may bear in mind the requirement that the law in its application must produce fair results.

Precedent Referred : i. Ameerunnissa Begum and others v. Mahboob Begum and others (1953) SCR 404;

Precedent Referred : ii. State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others (1974) 1 SCC 19;

Precedent Referred : iii. Murthy Match Works and others v. Assistant Collector of Central Excise and another (1974) 4 SCC 428;

Precedent Referred : iv. Ajoy Kumar Banerjee and others v. Union of India and others (1984) 3 SCC 127;

Precedent Referred : v. Ashutosh Gupta v. State of Rajasthan and others (2002) 4 SCC 34;

Precedent Relied : 4.4. In this regard, and specific to the interests of homebuyers, the Committee also noted that in cases where a homebuyer cannot file an application for initiation of CIRP for having failed to reach the aforesaid critical mass, she would still have access to alternative fora under the RERA and under consumer protection laws. For instance, as recognised by the Supreme Court in the case of Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Limited and Ors. v Union of India, the remedies under the Code and under the RERA operate in completely different spheres. The Code deals with proceedings in rem, under which homebuyers may want the corporate debtor's management to be removed and replaced so that the corporate debtor can be rehabilitated. On the other hand, the RERA protects the interests of the individual investor in real estate projects by ensuring that homebuyers are not left in the lurch, and get either compensation or delivery of their homes. Thus, if there is a failure to reach a critical mass for initiation of CIRP, it may indicate that in such cases another remedy may be more suitable.

Precedent Referred : i. Indra Sawhney and others v. Union of India and others 1992 Supp.(3) SCC 217;

Precedent Referred : ii. Lord Krishna Sugar Mills Limited and another v. Union of India and another (1960) 1 SCR 39;

Precedent Referred : iii. State of Kerala and another v. N.M. Thomas and others (1976) 2 SCC 310;

Precedent Referred : iv. State of West Bengal and another v. Rash Behari Sarkar and another (1993) 1 SCC 479;

Precedent Referred : v. State of Kerala v. Aravind Ramakant Modawdakar and others (1999) 7 SCC 400.

Precedent Distinguished : 37. She sought to distinguish the judgment of this Court in Sansar Chand Atri v. State of Punjab and another (2002) 4 SCC 154, which was relied on by the petitioners on the basis that this Court in the said case, only frowned upon creating a class within a class without rational basis. In this case, there was a rational basis for creating a sub-class. Differential treatment is also contemplated under UNCITRAL Legislative Guide and the Guidelines.

Precedent Relied : 38. There is no basis in the contention that the amendments go against the law laid down in Pioneer (supra). The question involved in the said case was not whether there can be a different treatment to the real estate allottees for the purpose of initiating CIRP. Secondly, it is pointed out that the Legislature is free to make laws to deal with problems that manifest with experience. The numerical threshold was felt necessary with experience and recommendations of an Expert Committee. There has been a manifold increase of claim petitions filed by single or handful of allottees resulting in an already overburdened Adjudicating Authorities being flooded with such petitions. The amendment is consistent with the Pioneer (supra) judgment. The uniqueness of the allottees as a class of financial creditors, has been recognized in Pioneer (supra). The fact that they constituted a distinct and separate class of financial creditors meriting distinct treatment, has been approved in Pioneer (supra). The minimum threshold requirement is a procedural requirement. There is no deviation from Pioneer (supra) in a manner which is irreconcilable with it. The legislation, being an economic measure, free play in the joints, must be accorded to the Legislature. The impugned amendment is reasonable, minimal and proportionate. The data gathered by the respondent discloses that between June, 2016 and 5th June, 2018, there were 253 cases filed by allottees in the N.C.L.T.. However, between 6th June, 2018 and 28th December, 2019, as many as 2201 cases were filed by the allottees. Thereafter, pursuant to the Ordinance between December 29th, 2019 and August 26th, 2020, there is a sharp fall, as, nearly in eight months, only 130 cases were filed. It is pointed out that the argument, based on estoppel and malice against the Legislature, is untenable. There can be no estoppel against the Legislature and the decision of this Court in Union of India and others v. Godfrey Philips India Ltd. (1985) 4 SCC 369, is relied on. The concept of transferred malice is alien in the field of legislation. In this regard, reference is placed on decisions of this Court in K. Nagaraj and others v. State of A.P. and another (1985) 1 SCC 523 and State of Himachal Pradesh v. Narain Singh (2009) 13 SCC 165.

Precedent Referred : 39. The right to file an application under Section 7 is a statutory right and it can be conditioned. Reliance is placed on judgment of this Court in Gujarat Agro Industries Co. Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad and others (1999) 4 SCC 468. There is no inherent or absolute right to file an application under Section 7 of the Code. The Legislature is well within its power to impose conditions for the exercise of such statutory rights. It is further contended that the third proviso inserted in Section 7(1) does not affect any vested right of the creditors who have already filed applications for initiating CIRP. A vested right has been the subject matter of several decisions. In this regard reliance is placed on the following judgments:

Precedent Referred : i. Howrah Municipal Corporation and others v. Ganges Rope Co. Ltd. and others (2004) 1 SCC 663;

Precedent Referred : ii. Arcelormittal India Private Limited v. Satish Kumar Gupta and others (2019) 2 SCC 1;

Precedent Referred : iii. Swiss Ribbons Private Limited and another v. Union of India and others (2019) 4 SCC 17;

Precedent Referred : iv. Karnail Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and others (2015) 3 SCC 206;

Precedent Referred : v. Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited Through Authorised Signatory v. Satish Kumar Gupta and Others (2019) SCCONLINE SC 1478.

Precedent Referred : i. Director of Public Works and another v. Ho Po Sang and Others [1961]3 WLR 39;

Precedent Referred : ii. M.S. Shivananda v. Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation and others (1980) 1 SCC 149;

Precedent Referred : iii. Lalji Raja and Sons v. Hansraj Nathuram (1971) 1 SCC 721;

Precedent Referred : iv. Kanaya Ram and others v. Rajender Kumar and others (1985) 1 SCC 436;

Precedent Relied : 42. Placing reliance on judgment of this Court, in Garikapati Veeraya(supra), it is contended that even a vested right can be taken away by the Legislature, if a subsequent enactment so expressly provides or if it so by necessary implication. A minimum threshold requirement is a common feature of class action litigation. There are several legislations which provide for a minimum threshold in order to initiate class action. Section 245 of the Companies Act, 2013 and 241 of the said Act are relied upon. Sections 397 and 398 of the Companies Act, 1956, read with Section 399, contemplated a minimum threshold requirement for seeking relief under Sections 397 and 398. Reference is placed on the Bhabha Committee Report (Company Law Committee) in 1952. So also, is support, sought to be drawn from the judgment of this Court in J.P. Srivastava & Sons (P) Ltd. and others v. Gwalior Sugar Co. Ltd. and others (2005) 1 SCC 172. Under the Consumer Protection Act, this Court, rendered the judgment in Anjum Hussain and others v. Intellicity Business Park Private Limited and others (2019) 6 SCC 519. A minimum threshold adds, authenticity and weightage to the claim in a class action, proving it to be a common grievance and not a mere obstruction in the work of the opposite party. Reference is made to Rule 23 of Federal Rules of Civil Procedure in the United States, which provide for class action suits. The said Rules contemplate numerosity, commonality, typicality and adequacy of representation. It is pointed out that joint filing was not only not alien to Section 7 but it was interwoven into its very DNA. Even as originally enacted, Section 7 contemplated joint filing by financial creditors. Uniqueness of the Code lies in the fact that the financial creditors may file an application based on a default that occurred in respect of the third-party financial creditor, who may choose not to file an application itself. At the triggering stage, an application under Section 7 partakes the character of an application in rem proceeding rather than in personam one. The impugned amendment merely extends the same rationale.

Precedent Referred : 47. The grounds on which plenary law can be challenged are well established. In the first two decades decisions of this Court unerringly point to three grounds which render legislation vulnerable. A law can be successfully challenged if contrary to the division of powers, either the Parliament or the State Legislature usurps power that does not fall within its domain thus, rendering it incompetent to make such law. Secondly, a law made contravening Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution of India would be visited with unconstitutionality and declared void to the extent of its contravention. Needless to say, a law within the meaning of Article 19 of the Constitution would remain valid qua a non-citizen (see in this regard The State of Gujarat and others v. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd., Ahmedabad and Others (1974) 4 SCC 656). Thirdly, apart from Fundamental Rights, the supremacy of the Constitution vis-a-vis the ordinary legislation, even when the law is plenary legislation, is preserved with a view that legislation must be in conformity with the other provisions of the Constitution.

Precedent Relied : 48. While on breaches of the Fundamental Right, furnishing a plank of attack against plenary law, it is necessary to notice a challenge to law under Article 14, was essentially confined to the law, being class legislation. In other words, a law, if it manifested reasonable classification for treating different persons or things differently, the law would pass muster. Interestingly, even while the theory of reasonable classification had come to be proclaimed in the first year of the Republic, and what is more followed in State of West-Bengal v. Anwar Ali AIR 1952 SC 75, the following doubts were expressed by Justice Vivian Bose:

Precedent Relied : 49. The seed of this idea had a muted growth. It was in the decision of this Court in E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu and Another (1974) 4 SCC 3 that this Court laid bare a new dimension in the majestic provisions of Article 14. This Court took the view that arbitrariness and fairness are sworn enemies. The guarantee of Article 14 is not confined in other words to it being a prohibition against equals being discriminated against or unequals being treated alike. State action must be fair and not arbitrary if it is to be pass muster in a court of law. It is essentially following the dicta laid down as aforesaid that this Court in the case of Shayara Bano v. Union of India (2017) 9 SCC 1, wherein one of us (Justice Rohinton F. Nariman), speaking for the majority, held as follows:

Precedent Referred : "101. It will be noticed that a Constitution Bench of this Court in Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of India [Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (1985) 1 SCC 641 : 1985 SCC (Tax) 121] stated that it was settled law that subordinate legislation can be challenged on any of the grounds available for challenge against plenary legislation. This being the case, there is no rational distinction between the two types of legislation when it comes to this ground of challenge under Article 14. The test of manifest arbitrariness, therefore, as laid down in the aforesaid judgments would apply to invalidate legislation as well as subordinate legislation under Article 14. Manifest arbitrariness, therefore, must be something done by the legislature capriciously, irrationally and/or without adequate determining principle. Also, when something is done which is excessive and disproportionate, such legislation would be manifestly arbitrary. We are, therefore, of the view that arbitrariness in the sense of manifest arbitrariness as pointed out by us above would apply to negate legislation as well under Article 14."

Precedent Referred : (1) Navtej Singh Johar and Others v. Union of India and Others (2018) 10 SCC 1;

Precedent Referred : (2) Joseph Shine v. Union of India (2019) 3 SCC 39;

Precedent Relied : (3) Justice K.S. Puttuswamy and Others v. Union of India and Others (2017) 10 SCC 1.

Precedent Referred : (4) Hindustan Construction Company Ltd. and Others v. Union of India and Others AIR 2020 SC 122.

Precedent Referred : 51. Yet another ground recognised by this Court is that a law, be it the offspring of a Legislature, it falls foul of Article 14 if it is found to be vague - (see in this regard Shreya Singhal v. Union of India (2015) 5 SCC 1). It must be elaborated and we must remember that the case involved overturning Section 66A of the Information Technology Act which purported to create a criminal offence, the ingredients of which were found to be vague.

Precedent Referred : 52. While, on the basis, furnished under law, for impugning the plenary legislation, we may notice two grounds, which have been urged before us by some of the petitioners. It has been urged that the law was created by way of pandering to the real estate lobby and succumbing to their pressure or by way of placating their vested interests. Such an argument is nothing but a thinly disguised attempt at questioning the law of the Legislature based on malice. A law is made by a body of elected representatives of the people. When they act in their legislative capacity, what is being rolled out is ordinary law. Should the same legislators sit to amend the Constitution, they would be acting as members of the Constituent Assembly. Whether it is ordinary legislation or an amendment to the Constitution, the activity is one of making the law. While malice may furnish a ground in an appropriate case to veto administrative action it is trite that malice does not furnish a ground to attack a plenary law [See in this regard K. Nagaraj and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh and another (1985) 1 SCC 523 and State of Himachal Pradesh v. Narain Singh (2009) 13 SCC 165].

Precedent Relied : 54. A supreme legislature cannot be cribbed, cabined or confined by the doctrine of promissory estoppel or estoppel. It acts as a sovereign body. The theory of promissory estoppel, on the one hand, has witnessed an incredible trajectory of growth but it is incontestable that it serves as an effective deterrent to prevent injustice from a Government or its agencies which seek to resile from a representation made by them, without just cause [See in this regard Union of India and others v. Godfrey Philips India Ltd.(1985) 4 SCC 369 - Paragraph-13]. UNRAVELLING THE WORKING OF THE CODE AS REGARDS CORPORATE DEBTOR

Precedent Referred : The scope of these provisions have been dealt with in the decision of this Court in Essar Steel India Limited vs. Satish Kumar Gupta and Ors. and (2019) 2 SCC 1 among other decisions authored by one of us (Justice R.F. Nariman).

Precedent Relied : 134. It is, therefore, clear that the requirement of the Code in regard to an application by a financial creditor does not mandate that the financial debt is owed to the applicant in terms of the Explanation. This is for the reason that apparently that the CIRP and which, if unsuccessful, is followed by the liquidation procedure is in all a proceeding, in rem. The Law Giver has envisaged in the Code, an action, merely for setting in motion the process initially. The litmus test on the anvil of which, the Adjudicating Authority will scrutinize the matter, is only the existence of the default, as defined in Section 4 of the Code. As on date, the amount of default is pegged at Rs. 1 crore. Present a financial debt which has not been paid, the doors are thrown open for the processes under the Code to flow in and overwhelm the corporate debtor. The further barrier is limitation, no doubt, as noticed in B.K. Educational Services Private Limited v. Parag Gupta & Associates (2019) 11 SCC 633. As with anything in life, not only will imperfections stand out and mathematical nicety be flouted, a law may end up seemingly trampling upon the interests of a few or even many. Since, the Code undoubtedly bears the brand of an economic measure upon its face, and in true spirit, being one of the most significant and dynamic economic experiments indulged in by the Law Giver, not by becoming servile to Parliament, but by way of time hallowed deference to the sovereign body experimenting in such matters, this Court will lean heavily in favour of such a law. The complaint of the petitioners that an increase in the required strength of applicants, will create legal knots which do not admit of solution, do not appeal to us and we intend lay bare how the law can indeed be worked, even with the extra burden which is cast on the persons covered by the provisos.

Precedent Referred : 142. In the decision of this Court in Rajahmundry Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. v. A. Nageshwara Rao and others AIR 1956 SC 213, the provision in question, viz., Section 153-C of Companies Act, 1913 dealt with the power of the Court to Act, when the Company acts in a prejudicial manner or oppresses any part of its members. It, inter alia, provided that no application could be made by any member, in the case of a company having a share capital unless the member has obtained consent, in writing, of not less than one hundred in number of the members of the company or not less than one-tenth in number of the members, whichever is less. There was also an alternate requirement, to which, resort could be made in regard to company, not having share capital. There was another mode of fulfilling the threshold requirement. In the facts of the said case, the number of the members of the company were 603. Sixty-five members consented to the application. The problem, however, arose as it was contended that 13 of the members who had consented, had, subsequent to the presentation of the application, withdrawn their consent. This Court went on to hold as follows:

Precedent Relied : 155. Thus, the procedure, under Order I Rule 8, is squarely made applicable to the proceedings under the Consumer Protection Act, in a situation, where, there are more than one consumer, having the same interest. It is true that the words "same interest", has been understood in the light of the Explanation under Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC and therefore, it is not necessary that all the numerous persons, within the meaning of the Consumer Protection Act or in a civil suit, need establish that they have the same cause of action. What is essential is that they have the same interest. Interpreting the words "same interest", it is still further true that this Court, in Chairman, Tamil Nadu Housing Board v. T. N. Ganapathy (1990) 1 SCC 608, has held that what is required is only community of interest. This was a case where a suit was filed by allottees of plots of low-income groups against the appellant-Housing Board seeking injunction from demanding and collecting any additional price and the suit was held maintainable under Order I Rule 8, even though separate demand notices were issued to each allottees.

Precedent Referred : 158. Are the Amendments violative of the 'Pioneer Judgment' in Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Ltd. and another v. Union of India and others (2019) 8 SCC 416, certain amendments to the Code were challenged. The challenged provisions included the Explanation added to Section 5(8)(f).

Precedent Relied : "30. As a matter of fact, the Code and RERA operate in completely different spheres. The Code deals with a proceeding in rem in which the focus is the rehabilitation of the corporate debtor. This is to take place by replacing the management of the corporate debtor by means of a resolution plan which must be accepted by 66% of the Committee of Creditors, which is now put at the helm of affairs, in deciding the fate of the corporate debtor. Such resolution plan then puts the same or another management in the saddle, subject to the provisions of the Code, so that the corporate debtor may be pulled out of the woods and may continue as a going concern, thus benefitting all stakeholders involved. It is only as a last resort that winding up of the corporate debtor is resorted to, so that its assets may be liquidated and paid out in the manner provided by Section 53 of the Code. On the other hand, RERA protects the interests of the individual investor in real estate projects by requiring the promoter to strictly adhere to its provisions. The object of RERA is to see that real estate projects come to fruition within the stated period and to see that allottees of such projects are not left in the lurch and are finally able to realise their dream of a home, or be paid compensation if such dream is shattered, or at least get back monies that they had advanced towards the project with interest. At the same time, recalcitrant allottees are not to be tolerated, as they must also perform their part of the bargain, namely, to pay instalments as and when they become due and payable. Given the different spheres within which these two enactments operate, different parallel remedies are given to allottees under RERA to see that their flat/apartment is constructed and delivered to them in time, barring which compensation for the same and/or refund of amounts paid together with interest at the very least comes their way. If, however, the allottee wants that the corporate debtor's management itself be removed and replaced, so that the corporate debtor can be rehabilitated, he may prefer a Section 7 application under the Code. That another parallel remedy is available is recognised by RERA itself in the proviso to Section 71(1), by which an allottee may continue with an application already filed before the Consumer Protection Fora, he being given the choice to withdraw such complaint and file an application before the adjudicating officer under RERA read with Section 88. In similar circumstances, this Court in Swaraj Infrastructure (P) Ltd. v. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. [Swaraj Infrastructure (P) Ltd. v. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd., (2019) 3 SCC 620 : (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 136] has held that the Debts Recovery Tribunal proceedings under the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 and winding-up proceedings under the Companies Act, 1956 can carry on in parallel streams (see paras 21 and 22 therein)."

Precedent Relied : "41. It is also important to remember that the Code is not meant to be a debt recovery mechanism (see para 28 of Swiss Ribbons [Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2019) 4 SCC 17]). It is a proceeding in rem which, after being triggered, goes completely outside the control of the allottee who triggers it. Thus, any allottee/home buyer who prefers an application under Section 7 of the Code takes the risk of his flat/apartment not being completed in the near future, in the event of there being a breach on the part of the developer. Under the Code, he may never get a refund of the entire principal, let alone interest. This is because, the moment a petition is admitted under Section 7, the resolution professional must first advertise for and find a resolution plan by somebody, usually another developer, which has then to pass muster under the Code i.e. that it must be approved by at least 66% of the Committee of Creditors and must further go through challenges before NCLT and NCLAT before the new management can take over and either complete construction, or pay out or refund amounts. Depending on the kind of resolution plan that is approved, such home buyer/allottee may have to wait for a very long period for the successful completion of the project. He may never get his full money back together with interest in the event that no suitable resolution plan is forthcoming, in which case, winding up of the corporate debtor alone would ensue. On the other hand, if such allottee were to approach the Real Estate Regulatory Authority under RERA, it is more than likely that the project would be completed early by the persons mentioned therein, and/or full amount of refund and interest together with compensation and penalty, if any, would be awarded. Thus, given the bona fides of the allottee who moves an application under Section 7 of the Code, it is only such allottee who has completely lost faith in the management of the real estate developer who would come before NCLT under the Code hoping that some other developer takes over and completes the project, while always taking the risk that if no one were to come forward, corporate death must ensue and the allottee must then stand in line to receive whatever is given to him in winding up. Given the reasons of the Insolvency Committee Report, which show that experience of the real estate sector in this country has not been encouraging, in that huge amounts are advanced by ordinary people to finance housing projects which end up in massive delays on the part of the developer or even worse i.e. failure of the project itself, and given the state of facts which was existing at the time of the legislation, as adverted to by the Insolvency Committee Report, it is clear that any alleged discrimination has to meet the tests laid down in Ram Krishna Dalmia [Ram Krishna Dalmia v. S.R. Tendolkar, 1959 SCR 279 : AIR 1958 SC 538], V.C. Shukla [V.C. Shukla v. State (Delhi Admn.), 1980 Supp SCC 249 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 849], Shri Ambica Mills Ltd. [State of Gujarat v. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd., (1974) 4 SCC 656 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 381], Venkateshwara Theatre [Venkateshwara Theatre v. State of A.P., (1993) 3 SCC 677] and Mardia Chemicals [Mardia Chemicals Ltd. v. Union of India, (2004) 4 SCC 311]."

Precedent Referred : 170. It is also correct that this decision has come to be relied upon by this Court recently in Union of India vs. Tarsem Singh (2019) 9 SCC 304.

Precedent Referred : "18. This submission is erroneous in its formulation of a legal proposition governing onus of proof and it is unjustified in the charge that the record discloses no evidence to show the necessity of the new Rule. There is always a presumption in favour of the constitutionality of an enactment and the burden upon him who attacks it to show that there has been a clear transgression of the constitutional principles. [Ram Krishan Dalmia v. Justice S. R. Tendolkar AIR 1958 SC 538: 1959 SCR 279, 297(b): 1959 SCJ 147] A rule cannot be struck down as discriminatory on any a priori reasoning. "That where a party seeks to impeach the validity of a rule made by a competent authority on the ground that the Rules offend Act. 14 the burden is on him to plead and prove the infirmity is too well established to need elaboration." The burden thus is on the respondents to set out facts necessary to sustain the plea of discrimination and to adduce "cogent and convincing evidence" to prove those facts for "there is a presumption that every factor which is relevant or material has been taken into account in formulating the classification". [State of U. P. v. Kartar SinghAIR 1964 SC 1135 : (1964) 6 SCR 679, 687 : (1964) 2 SCJ 666.] In G.D. Kelkar v. Chief Controller of Imports and Exports [AIR 1967 SC 839 : (1967) 2 SCR 29, 34 : (1967) 2 SCJ 182] Subba Rao, C.J., speaking for the Court has cited three other decisions of the Court in support of the proposition that "unless the classification is unjust on the face of it, the onus lies upon the party attacking the classification to show by pleading the necessary material before the Court that the said classification is unreasonable and violative of Article 16 of the Constitution".

Precedent Relied : 13. Right at the threshold we must warn ourselves of the limitations of judicial power in this jurisdiction. Mr Justice Stone of the Supreme Court of the United States has delineated these limitations in United States v. Butler [(1936) 297 US 1: Tresolini and Shapiro: American Constitutional Law, 3rd Edn.] thus:

Precedent Referred : 175. In State of Gujarat and Another v. Shree Ambica Mills Ltd (1974) 4 SCC 656, this Court has laid down certain principles relating to under inclusive and over inclusive classification. This is, no doubt, apart from holding that a law which contravenes fundamental rights of the citizens may continue to be valid as regards non-citizens. As regards classification and the vice of under inclusive and over inclusive classification we may notice the following statement of the law:

Precedent Referred : 62. In short, the problem of legislative classification is a perennial one, admitting of no doctrinaire definition. Evils in the same field may be of different dimensions and proportions requiring different remedies. Or so the legislature may think (see Tigner v. Texas). [310 US 141]

Precedent Referred : 177. In Ajoy Kumar Banerjee and ors. v. Union of India and ors. (1984) 3 SCC 127, this Court, inter-alia, held, while dealing with the challenge to a scheme, as amended by employees of Insurance Companies, on the grounds that it violated the fundamental rights of Article 14, 19 (1) g and 31 of the Constitution. This Court held inter-alia as follows:

Precedent Relied : 178. In the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Subramanian Swami vs. Director, CBI and ors. (2014) 8 SCC 682 the issue was the constitutional validity of Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946. Section 6A declared that the CBI shall not conduct any inquiry or investigation into any offence alleged to have been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 except with the previous approval of the Central Government where the allegation was in relation to employees of the Central government of the level of Joint Secretary and above and also officers appointed by the Central Government in public sector corporations controlled by the Central Government. It is dealing with this challenge that this Court went on to hold after refering to the earlier case law including the judgment of this Court in the Special Courts case (supra) that it is well settled that the Courts do not substitute their views as to what the policy is. It held as follows:

Precedent Distinguished : "83. A classification is reasonable if it includes all persons who are similarly situated with respect to the purpose of the law. In other words, the classification must be founded on some reasonable ground which distinguishes persons who are grouped together and the ground of distinction must have rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the rule or even the rules in question. It is a mistake to assume a priori that there can be no classification within a class, say, the lower division clerks. If there are intelligible differentia which separates a group within that class from the rest and that differentia have nexus with the object of classification, I see no objection to a further classification within the class. It is no doubt a paradox that though in one sense classification brings about inequality, it is promotive of equality if its object is to bring those who share a common characteristic under a class for differential treatment for sufficient and justifiable reasons. In this view, I have no doubt that the principle laid down in All India Station Masters and Assistant Station Masters Association v. General Manager, Central Railway [(1960) 2 SCR 311 : AIR 1960 SC 384.]; S.G. Jaisinghani v. Union of India and State of J&K. v. Triloki Nath Khosa [(1974) 1 SCR 771 : (1974) 1 SCC 19 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 49.] has no application here."

Precedent Referred : 183. In Indira Sawney v. Union of India 1992 Supp 3 SCC 217, this Court held, "This merely sees goes to show that even among backward classes, there can be sub-classification on a reasonable basis."

Precedent Relied : 184. In State of West Bengal and ors. v. Rash Bihari Sarkar and ors. (1993) 1 SCC 479, exemption was granted under Bengal Amusements Act, 1922 as amended in 1981 from Entertainment Tax for theatre groups which were bonafide and which performed not for monetary gain which tax exemption was not given to theatre groups which performed for monetary gains. Both were theatre groups. Noticing however, the distinction between the theatre groups, this Court went on to hold as follows:

Precedent Relied : 185. In State of Kerala v. Aravind Ramakant Modawdakar and ors. 1999 7 SCC 400, reduction in taxes was given to inter-state stage carriage operators which benefit was not extended to intra-state stage carriage operators. The Court though noted, that both the inter-state operators and intra-state operators were, in a generic sense, state carriage operators, there was a distinction between the two. It is apposite to refer to what this Court laid down in para 10 of the judgement.

Precedent Relied : 186. In Sansar Chand Atri v. State of Punjab and another (2002) 4 SCC 154, relied upon by the petitioners, for contending that Article 14 frowns upon creation of a sub-class within a class, the case turned on its facts. What is significant, however, is the reasoning. The question, in short, was whether the appellant was an ex-serviceman or not, on the basis of the provisions of the Punjab Recruitment of Ex-Servicemen Rules, 1982, as amended by Notification dated 22.09.1992. The contention of the respondent was that since the appellant was discharged from the army on his own request, he could not be treated as an ex-serviceman. After considering the Rules, as amended and on the facts, it was held as follows:

Precedent Relied : 188. We are of the view that the principles, which governed the legitimacy of the sub-class within a class, is based, essentially, on the very principles, which are discernible in regard to reasonable classification under Article 14. It is clear that the law does not interdict the creation of a class within a class absolutely. Should there be a rational basis for creating a sub-class within a class, then, it is not impermissible. This is the inevitable result of an analysis of the judgments relied upon by the petitioner themselves, viz., Sansar Chand Atri v. State of Punjab and another (supra). The decisions, which have been relied upon by the Union and which we have adverted to, clearly indicate that a class within a sub-class, is indeed not antithetical to the guarantee of equality under Article 14.

Precedent Relied : 199. We see considerable merit in the stand of the Union. This is not a case where there is no intelligible differentia. The law under scrutiny is an economic measure. As laid down by this Court, in dealing with the challenge on the anvil of Article 14, the Court will not adopt a doctrinaire approach. Representatives of the people are expected to operate on democratic principles. The presumption is that they are conscious of every fact, which would go to sustain the constitutionality of the law. A law cannot operate in a vacuum. In the concrete world, when the law is put into motion in practical experiences, bottlenecks that would flow from its application, are best envisaged by the Law Givers. Solutions to vexed problems made manifest through experience, would indeed require a good deal of experimentation, as long as it passes muster in law. It is no part of a court's function to probe into what it considers to be more wise or a better way to deal with a problem. In economic matters, the wider latitude given to the Law Giver is based on sound principle and tested logic over time. In fact, though there is no rigid separation of powers in India, as it obtains in the United States, there is broadly separation of powers, which in fact, has been recognized as a basic feature of the Constitution (see His Holiness Kesavananda Bharti Sripadagalvaru v. State of Kerala and another (1973) 4 SCC 225). In any case, the Court errs in the judicial veto of legislation, in a manner of speaking, it is usurping the power, which is earmarked to another organ of the State, viz., the Legislature. The large number of validating acts would produce undeniable proof of the same.

Precedent Referred : ALLOTTEES VS. OPERATIONAL CREDITORS

Precedent Referred : 203. In Innoventive Industries Limited v. ICICI Bank and another (2018) 1 SCC 407, this Court elaborately analysed the scheme of the Code and the distinction between the financial creditors and the operational creditors. This Court noticed that in the case of application, under Section 8, by an operational creditor, the corporate debtor within ten days of the notice, issued under Section 8 can bring to the notice of the operational creditor, the existence of the dispute or a record of a proceeding in a court or before an Arbitrator. This exercise, successfully carried out by the corporate debtor, will enable it to get out of the purview of the Code. In case of a financial creditor, if the debt is due, that it is payable unless it is interdicted by some law or it has not become due, the default, contemplated under the Code, has occurred and the application, filed by the financial creditor, must be admitted and the matter proceeded with.

Precedent Relied : 43. Shri Shyam Divan relying upon Nagpur Improvement Trust v. Vithal Rao [Nagpur Improvement Trust v. Vithal Rao, (1973) 1 SCC 500] SCC para 26 and Subramanian swamy v. CBI [Subramanian Swamy v. CBI, (2014) 8 SCC 682 : (2014) 6 SCC (Cri) 42 : (2014) 3 SCC (L&S) 36] SCC paras 44, 58 and 68 argued that the object of the amendment is itself discriminatory in that it seeks to insert into a "means and includes" definition a category which does not fit therein, namely, real estate developers who do not, in the classical sense, borrow monies like banks and financial institutions. According to him, therefore, the object itself being discriminatory, the inclusion of real estate developers as financial debtors should be struck down. We have already pointed out how real estate developers are, in substance, persons who avail finance from allottees who then fund the real estate development project. The object of dividing debts into two categories under the Code, namely, financial and operational debts, is broadly to sub-divide debts into those in which money is lent and those where debts are incurred on account of goods being sold or services being rendered. We have no doubt that real estate developers fall squarely within the object of the Code as originally enacted insofar as they are financial debtors and not operational debtors, as has been pointed out hereinabove. So far as unequals being treated as equals is concerned, homebuyers/allottees can be assimilated with other individual financial creditors like debenture holders and fixed-deposit holders, who have advanced certain amounts to the corporate debtor. For example, fixed-deposit holders, though financial creditors, would be like real estate allottees in that they are unsecured creditors. Financial contracts in the case of these individuals need not involve large sums of money. Debenture holders and fixed-deposit holders, unlike real estate holders, are involved in seeing that they recover the amounts that are lent and are thus not directly involved or interested in assessing the viability of the corporate debtors. Though not having the expertise or information to be in a position to evaluate feasibility and viability of resolution plans, such individuals, by virtue of being financial creditors, have a right to be on the Committee of Creditors to safeguard their interest. Also, the question that is to be asked when a debenture holder or fixed-deposit holder prefers a Section 7 application under the Code will be asked in the case of allottees of real estate developers - is a debt due in fact or in law? Thus, allottees, being individual financial creditors like debenture holders and fixed-deposit holders and classified as such, show that they are within the larger class of financial creditors, there being no infraction of Article 14 on this score."

Precedent Relied : 216. Learned counsel would commend to us the principle of absurdity. It is pointed out that the principle of absurdity should guide this Court to read down the first proviso to not apply it in regard to security holders and debenture holders. In this regard our attention has been drawn to the decision of this court in Vasant Ganpat Padave (D) by L.Rs. and Ors. v. Anant Mahadev Sawant (D) through L.Rs. and Ors. (2019) 12 SCALE 579. It is further brought to the notice of the court that the provision suffers from manifest arbitrariness. Counsel relies upon the judgement of this Court in Shayara Bano v. Union of India and others (2017) 9 SCC 1 decision which witnessed the striking down of the law relating to triple talak. Per contra, it is the stand of the Union that Section 21(6A)(a) and (b) read with Section 25A of the Code contemplated certain classes of financial creditors as falling in a separate class by themselves.

Precedent Referred : An Explanation cannot modify the main provision to which it is an Explanation. Section 11(a) and Section 11(b) unequivocally bar a Corporate Debtor from filing a CIRP Application qua another Corporate Debtor under Section 7 and Section 9 of the Code. Support is sought to be drawn from the exposition of the law qua an explanation laid down in S. Sundaram Pillai and others v. R. Pattabiraman and others (1985) 1 SCC 591 and Sonia Bhatia v. State of U.P. and others (1981) 2 SCC 585. It is complained that the label of an Explanation has been used to substantially amend, which is an arbitrary and irrational exercise of power.

Precedent Relied : 228. It was pointed out that the word 'includes' in Explanation-I to Section 11 would indicate that an Application for CIRP is barred not only against itself but also against any other Corporate Debtor when the applicant-Corporate Debtor is found placed in circumstances expressed in Section 11. It is further contended that the impugned Amendment, effectively repeals Sections 11(a) and 11(d). If the purport of the Explanation, which is impugned, is that the intention of the law was to only bar an Application for CIRP by a Corporate Debtor against itself, then, it will be unworkable and practically impossible. Explanation-II is manifestly arbitrary. Support is sought to be drawn from Shayara Bano (supra). It was further contended that the amendment cannot be used retrospectively and take away the vested right. In fact, it is contended that a clarificatory amendment is prospective but Explanation II is in reality a substantive provision. Attempt is made to lay store by the Judgment of this Court in Virtual Soft Systems Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi-I (2007) 9 SCC 665, wherein this Court was dealing with Section 271 of the Income-Tax Act, 1961, in which, an Explanation was added. The Section in question, was a penal provision.

Precedent Relied : 6.2. The Committee noted that different Adjudicating Authorities had taken different approaches regarding the right of a resolution professional to initiate CIRP against other corporate debtors. On the one hand, the right of the resolution professional to initiate CIRP against other corporate debtors was upheld by relying on the statutory duty of the resolution professional to recover outstanding dues of the corporate debtor under Section 25(2)(b). On the other hand, the resolution professional had been prevented from doing so, on the basis of a literal interpretation of Section 11(a). While the Appellate Authority had dismissed the appeals filed against some of these orders without endorsing either of these approaches, in Abhay N. Manudhane v Gupta Coal India Pvt. Ltd., it had taken the latter approach and denied the liquidator the right to file an application to initiate CIRP against other corporate debtors (in the context of Section 11(d)).

Precedent Relied : "49. The principles laid down by the aforesaid authors are fully supported by various authorities of this Court. To quote only a few, in Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of India Ltd. v. CTO [(1961) 1 SCR 902 : AIR 1961 SC 315 : (1960) 11 STC 764] a Constitution Bench decision, Hidayatullah, J. speaking for the Court, observed thus:

Precedent Referred : 50. In Bihta Cooperative Development Cane Marketing Union Ltd. v. Bank of Bihar [(1967) 1 SCR 848 : AIR 1967 SC 389 : 37 Com Cas 98] this Court observed thus:

Precedent Referred : 52. In Dattatraya Govind Mahajan v. State of Maharashtra [(1977) 2 SCR 790 : (1977) 2 SCC 548 : AIR 1977 SC 915] Bhagwati, J. observed thus: (SCC p. 563, para 9)

Precedent Relied : 233. It is important to actually understand the scope of an Explanation. We have already noticed the summary of the conclusions of this Court in S. Sundaram Pillai (supra) at paragraph-53. It may give the impression that an Explanation, in those circumstances, does not widen the boundaries of the main provision to which it is an Explanation. However, it is apposite that we hearken back to what this Court said on an earlier occasion. In a judgment rendered by four learned Judges in Hiralal Rattanlal and Ors. v. State of U.P. and Another (1973) 1 SCC 216, this Court had, while considering the scope of an Explanation in a Taxing Statute, viz., the United Provinces Sales Tax Act, 1948, had this to say:

Precedent Relied : "22. It was next urged that on a true construction of Explanation II to Section 3-D, no charge can be said to have been created on the purchases of split or processed pulses. It was firstly contended that an Explanation cannot extend the scope of the main section, it can only explain that section. In construing a statutory provision, the first and the foremost rule of construction is the literary construction. All that we have to see at the very outset is what does that provision say? If the provision is unambiguous and if from that provision, the legislative intent is clear, we need not call into aid the other rules of construction of statutes. The other rules of construction of statutes are called into aid only when the legislative intention is not clear. Ordinarily a proviso to a section is intended to take out a part of the main section for special treatment. It is not expected to enlarge the scope of the main section. But cases have arisen in which this Court has held that despite the fact that a provision is called proviso, it is really a separate provision and the so-called proviso has substantially altered the main section. In CIT v. Bipinchandra Maganlal & Co. Ltd., Bombay [AIR 1961 SC 1040 : (1961) 2 SCR 493 : (1961) 41 ITR 290] this Court held that by the fiction in Section 10(2)(vii) second proviso read with Section 2(6-C) of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 what is really not income is, for the purpose of computation of assessable income, made taxable income.

Precedent Referred : "24. In Bihta Co-operative Development Cane Marketing Union Ltd. v. Bank of Bihar [AIR 1967 SC 389 : (1967) 1 SCR 848 : 37 Com Cas 98] this Court was called upon to consider the Explanation to Section 48(1) of the Bihar and Orissa Cooperative Societies Act, 1935. Therein this Court observed: "The question then arises whether the first Explanation to the section widens the scope of sub-section (1) of Section 48 so as to include claims by registered societies, against non-members even if the same are not covered by clause (c)."

Precedent Referred : 262. In this regard, several contentions are raised. It is pointed out by the learned Counsel for the petitioners, apart from the plea of discrimination, which is alleged against the first and second provisos, that the third proviso, makes a clear incursion into a vested right. The impugned third proviso is afflicted with the vice of manifest arbitrariness. It is contended that the petitioners, who had moved an application under the erstwhile regime, were legally entitled to make such an application, whether it is by a single allottee or jointly. This was a substantive right. Availing such substantive right, under a Statute, when the application stood instituted, they had the right to continue with the proceeding unimpaired and unhindered by the new threshold requirement, which cannot be made applicable in their cases. It is contended that when there is a repeal of a Statute, the existing rights are saved. In this case, there was an existing right with the petitioners to institute the application under Section 7 and, therefore, this right cannot be imperilled by enacting the amendment. It is pointed out that the statutory time limit to decide an application, was fourteen days. This Court, in Pioneer (supra), also stressed the importance of disposing matters, within the period, even though, it may have laid down that the period is not inflexibly mandatory and that it is directory. In the case of the petitioners, the applications were pending for more than a year. Classifying the applications under the same head, is arbitrary and irrational. The petitioners have spent substantial sums towards court fee, legal and other expenses, in addition to considerable time. There is no provision to ameliorate their losses. Withdrawals and fresh filing would derail the insolvency process. Our attention is draw to the judgment of this Court in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur and others v. State of Maharashtra and others (1994) 4 SCC 602, wherein this Court laid down that Statute, which affects substantive right, is presumed to be prospective, unless made retrospective expressly or by necessary intendment. Every litigant has a vested right in substantive matters but no such right exists in procedural law. The law relating to right of action and right of appeal, even though remedial, is substantive in nature. A procedural Statute should not, generally speaking, be applied retrospectively, where the result would be to create new disabilities or obligations or to impose new duties in respect of accomplished transactions. Reliance is placed similarly on the judgment of this Court in Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd. v. Amrit Lal & Co. and another (2001) 8 SCC 397. The period of 30 days is far too short and that too, under an amendment, which is itself impossible to comply with. In this regard, also judgment of this Court in B.K. Educational Services Private Ltd. v. Parag Gupta and Associates (2019) 11 SCC 633/2018 1 IBJ (JP) 649 SC, is referred to. The proviso cannot be applied retrospectively. The proviso is penal, arbitrary, unjust and unfair. Reliance is placed on In Re: Pulborough Parish School Board Election, Bourke v. Nutt (1894) 1 QB 725.

Precedent Referred : 272. In Lalji Raja and Sons v. Hansraj Nathuram (1971) 1 SCC 721, this court inter alia held as follows:

Precedent Relied : "16. That a provision to preserve the right accrued under a repealed Act "was not intended to preserve the abstract rights conferred by the repealed Act.... It only applies to specific rights given to an individual upon happening of one or the other of the events specified in statute see" - Lord Atkin's observations in Hamilton Cell v. White. [(1922) 2 KB 422] The mere right, existing at the date of spealing statute, to take advantage of provisions of the statute repealed is not a "right accrued" within the meaning of the usual saving clause - see Abbot v. Minister for Lands [(1895) AC 425] and G. Ogden Industries Pvt. Ltd. v. Lucas. [(1969) 1 All ER 121]"

Precedent Relied : 276. In Hamilton Gell v. White (1922) 2 K.B. 422, upon a quit notice given by the landlord, the tenant sought to avail the benefit of Section 11 of the Agricultural Holdings Act, 1914 by successfully complying with one out of the two conditions for seeking the compensation. Before the tenant could comply with the further condition, which was that he should move the action within two months, after quitting the holding, Section 11 was repealed. He subsequently made his claim within three months, as limited by the repealed Section. The matter went to an Arbitrator. The Arbitrator stated a special case. He raised two questions. Firstly, whether the tenant was entitled to claim compensation under the repealing Act of 1920 and, secondly, whether he could claim under the repealed Act notwithstanding the repeal. The first question was answered against the tenant, with which, the Court of Appeal agreed. As regards the second question, the Court was of the view that the tenant was entitled to succeed. The following is the reasoning, in short:

Precedent Referred : 279. In Odgen Industries Pty. Ltd. v. Haider Doreen Lucas 3 WLR 75 / (1969) (1) All England Reports 121, the following facts in a case which originated in Australia may be noticed. An employee of the appellant died on 7th July, 1965. His death was materially contributed by injuries, which, in turn, arose out of and in the course of his employment with the appellants. The employee was hospitalized in March, 1965 for treatment and he again came to be hospitalized in 19th June, 1965 and, thereafter, he died on 07.07.1965. He left behind him the respondent, his widow and two children under the age of 16, who were wholly dependent on the employee's earnings. The amount of compensation for the dependents would have been calculated under the Workers Compensation Act, 1958. The Act, however, was amended by the Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act, 1965. The Amendment Act, came into force for 01.07.1965. The Amendment Act increased the benefits payable to the dependents. The High Court of Australia dismissed the appeal of the employer and affirmed the award of the Workman's compensation board paying the increased compensation under the Amending Act. The Privy Council was called upon to decide two questions. Firstly, the question was whether, as the Amendment Act came into operation after the original injury to the employee, his dependents were entitled to the increased rates prescribed by the amending Act. Secondly, did the deceased, after the 30.06.1965, suffer a further injury or aggravation, which gave him new title for the purpose of the Amendment Act. The Court, went on to hold as inter-alia follows:

Precedent Relied : 281. Now, it is necessary to refer to the judgment of this Court in Isha Valimohamed v. Haji Gulam Mohamad & Haji Dada Trust (1974) 2 SCC 484. The facts in the said case are to be noticed in some detail for it may have bearing on the questions to be answered by us. The Respondent landlord purported to terminate the tenancy in relation to a building by a notice dated 12.02.1964 on the ground inter alia of subletting. It must be noticed that at the time the subletting took place the building was covered by Saurashtra Rent Control Act, 1951. The said Act provided that the landlord shall be entitled to recover possession in the case of subletting by the tenant. It is while this Act was in force that the tenant sublet the premises. However, the Saurashtra Act came to be repealed by the Bombay Rents, Hotels and Lodging Houses Rates Control Act, 1947 on 31.12.1963. Section 51 of the Bombay Act, inter alia, contained the saving clause that the repeal would not affect any right, privilege, obligation, liability accrued or incurred under any law so repealed. The notice, terminating tenancy was issued on 12.02.1964 after the repeal of the 'Saurashtra Act'. The High court took the view that the landlord had an accrued right under saving clause of the Bombay Act. The suit was brought after the repeal.

Precedent Relied : 287. What is further significant to be noticed is that the decision involved a case where, though styled as a suit, the proceeding under the Saurashtra Act was a proceeding under a Statute and the right was one created by the statute and what gave the right to the landlord was an act of subletting. The said right was what was not wiped out by the repeal. As already noticed the suit itself was filed after the repeal. The discussion on the distinction between a privilege and an accrued right in the said decision has been relied upon recently in a judgement by one of us (Justice R.F. Nariman) in Bombay Stock Exchange v. V.S. Kandalgaonkar (2015) 2 SCC 1.

Precedent Referred : 288. In New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Shanti Misra (1975) 2 SCC 840, the husband of the first respondent died as a result of a motor accident. The suit could be brought under Article 82 of the Limitation Act 1963 within two years of the accident. On 18.03.1867, the Government of Uttar Pradesh constituted the claim Tribunal under Section 110 of the Motor Vehicle Act. The application of the respondents before the Tribunal was objected to by the appellant insurer. While deciding in favour of the respondents and holding that the application was maintainable before the Tribunal, this court, inter-alia, held as follows:

Precedent Referred : "9. In Gopeshwar Pal v. Jiban Chandra Chandra [ILR 51 Cal 1125] Jenkins, C.J. delivering the judgment on behalf of the majority of the Full Bench said at p. 1141:

Precedent Referred : The majority of the Full Bench of the Madras High Court in Rajah Sahib Meharban-i-Doston Sri Raja Row V.K.M. Surya Row Bahadur, Sirdar, Rajahmundry Sircar and Rajah of Pittapur v. G. Venkata Subba Row [ILR 34 Mad 645] has taken the same view following the Full Bench decision in Gopeshwar Pal case at p. 650. Amendment of the law of limitation could not destroy the plaintiff's right of action which was in existence when the Act came into force. We are conscious of the distinction which was sought to be made in the application of these principles. It was said that the right could not be destroyed but recourse to suit would be available under the old law of limitation. We, however, think that giving retrospective effect to the change of law in relation to the forum, in the context of the object of the change, is imperative. That being so the principles aforesaid for overcoming the bar of limitation will be applicable."

Precedent Referred : 291. This judgment has been followed in Vinod Gurudas Raikar v. National Insurance Co. Ltd. & ors (1991) 4 SCC 333 and also in Union of India v. Harnam Singh (1993) 2 SCC 162 and recently also by this Court in B.K. Educational Services (supra).

Precedent Referred : 292. In V. Dhanapal Chettiar v. Yesodai Ammal (1979) 4 SCC 214, a Bench of seven learned Judges while taking the view that a notice to quit under section 106 of the TP Act 1882 was not necessary for an Eviction Petition under any of the State Rent Acts observed in regard to Isha Valimohamed (supra) that the view taken in the said case that the landlord could not have issued notice to determine the tenancy on the ground of subletting under any of the provisions of Transfer of Property Act was not correct as a notice issued under Section 111 (h) does not require any ground to be made out for termination of the tenancy. It was further held that the view taken in Isha Valimohamed (supra), in this regard, would be taken only under Section 111 (g).

Precedent Relied : 293. In D. C. Bhatia v. Union of India (1995) 1 SCC 104, the Delhi Rent Control Act came to be amended with effect from 01.12.1988, by which amendment, the Act was not to apply to any premises, the monthly rent of which exceeded Rs. 3500/-. Dealing with the tenants' contention that he had a vested right this Court took the view that if the tenant is sought to be evicted before the amendment, they could have taken advantage of the provisions of the Act to resist such eviction. But this was nothing more than the right to take advantage of the law and the tenant had statutory protection only as long as the law remains in force. We may only notice paragraph-53. It read as under:

Precedent Referred : 294. In Mst. Bibi Sayeeda & Ors. v. State of Bihar and Others (1996) 9 SCC 516/AIR 1996 SC 1936, the Court was to dealing with the meaning of the word 'Bazar' in the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act 30 of 1950). In the course, of the said judgement the Court went on to hold that the right of the proprietor of a State to hold a 'Mela' on its own land is a right in the estate being appurtenant to the ownership of his land. In the context, of property rights undoubtedly the Court went on to make the following observations:

Precedent Relied : 295. Though this is a case which dealt with vested right qua property there is indeed authority for the proposition that the concept of vested right is not confined to a property right. In this regard we may profitably refer to the special bench of judgement of High Court of Calcutta reported in Gopeshur Pal v. Jiban Chandra Chandra and others AIR 1914 Calcutta 806, referred to by this Court in AIR 1976 SC 237 (supra) when it was, inter alia, held:

Precedent Referred : 3."On the contrary, the essential conditions of the two cases are so distinct that in our opinion it cannot be said that the earlier decision is, in relation to the circumstances of this case, affected by the judgment of the Privy Council. It is an established axiom of construction that though procedure may be regulated by the Act for the time being in force, still, the intention to take away a vested right without compensation or any saving, is not to be imputed to the Legislature, unless it be expressed in unequivocal terms [cf. The Commissioner of Public Works v. Logan [L.R. 1903 A.C. 355.]]. That this view is not limited to those cases where rights of property in the limited sense are involved, is shown by the Colonial Sugar Refining Co. v. Irving [L.R. 1905 A.C. 369.], where it was held that an Act ought not to be so construed as to deprive a suitor of an appeal in a pending action, which belonged to him as of right at the date of the passing of the Act. Equally is a right of suit a vested right, and in Jackson v. Woolley [8 Ell. and Bl. 784 (1859).], the Court of Exchequer Chamber declined, in the absence of something putting the matter beyond doubt, to put on an Act a construction that would deprive any person of a right of action vested in him at the time of the passing of the Act.

Precedent Relied : 296. In M.S. Shivananda v. Karnataka SRTC (1980) 1 SCC 149, under an ordinance, employees of the erstwhile State Carriage Operators were to be absorbed by State Road Transport corporation subject to certain conditions. The ratio was provided. The ordinance was replaced by an Act. The ratio, however, stood altered. This affected the chances of absorption of the workers. This led to writ petitions. The question which fell to be decided with reference to the effect of repeal and what constituted a right. The court held inter-alia as follows:

Precedent Relied : "15. The distinction between what is, and what is not a right preserved by the provisions of Section 6 of the General clauses Act is often one of great fineness. What is unaffected by the repeal of a statute is a right acquired or accrued under it and not a mere "hope or expectation of", or liberty to apply for, acquiring a right. In Director of Public Works v. Ho Po Sang [(1961) 2 All ER 721, 731 (PC)] Lord Morris speaking for the Privy Council, observed:

Precedent Distinguished : 297. In Kanaya Ram (supra) the predecessor in interest of the appellants had applied for purchase of the tenancy right under the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act 1953. During the pendency of the proceedings before the Assistant Collector, certain persons were impleaded as respondents on the basis that they were the legal heirs of the landlord. Thereafter, their names were struck off as unnecessary. On the same day, the application of the predecessor in interest of the appellants was allowed. Thereafter, there was certain oral sales by the original land owner. The contention which apparently was taken by the legal heirs of landlord upon his death was that the original landlord died during the pendency of the proceedings, and there was change in the status of the land owners against whom the application under Section 18(1) of the Act was made as on that date as his legal heirs became small land owners. The Financial Commissioner before whom the matter reached, however, was of the view that the application made by the appellants predecessor being competent on the date it was filed, the rights of the parties had to be adjudicated on that basis. The learned Single Judge of the High Court took the view, however, that the changed situation brought about by the death of the big land owner had to be taken into account in determining the right of the tenant. Respondents 3 to 14 who were the legal heirs of the landlord instituted a suit against the transferees from the landlord on the basis that they were mere benmaidars of the land owner and no title passed to them as the alleged sales were not effected by registered instruments under section 54 which had been extended by the Government of Punjab with effect from 1st April 1955 to the State. The suit came to be decreed. They sought impleadment before the High Court on the ground that the Collector had in determining the surplus area of the land of the land owners held that the sales in favour of respondents 1 and 2 were benami. The Collector found that on the death of the original land owners, respondents 3 to 14 became small land owners. The Division Bench took the view that no oral sale could be made, and therefore, the transfers made in favour of respondents 1 and 2 did not pass any title. This Court, apart from noticing the fact that as the special leave had been refused against the main judgment the appeal was no longer tenable it, held that the original land owner was not impleaded by the predecessor in interest of the appellants in his application even though respondents 3 to 14 were impleaded and they were subsequently deleted on appellant's objection that they were not necessary parties. This Court went on to distinguish the judgment in Rameshwar and Others v. Jot Ram and Another (1976) 1 SCC 194 as it was a case where the tenants after making the requisite application had made the necessary deposit of the first instalment of the purchase price. It was in such circumstances noted that the tenants had acquired a vested right to purchase the land and the case had gone beyond the stage of mere application under section 18(1). This Court noted that the observation of the Court that the rights of the parties are determined "by the facts as they exist on the date of the action" must be held in the context in which they were made. What is relevant is the following statement is the judgment in Kanaya Ram (supra):

Precedent Relied : "10.......In the present case, Harditta Ram, the predecessor-in-title of the appellants, when he made the application for purchase under Section 18(1) of the Act, had a mere "hope or expectation of, or liberty to apply for, acquiring a right" and not a "right acquired or accrued" under Section 18(1). It has been held ever since the leading case of Abbott v. Minister for Lands [1895 AC 425 : 64 LJPC 167 : 72 LT 402 (PC)] [1895 AC 425 : 64 LJPC 167 : 72 LT 402 (PC)] that a mere right to take advantage of the provisions of an Act is not an accrued right. Abbott case [1895 AC 425: 64 LJPC 167 : 72 LT 402 (PC)] has been followed by this Court in a number of decisions. In such a situation, the Court is bound to take into consideration the subsequent events and mould the relief accordingly. The decision in Rameshwar case [(1976) 1 SCC 194 : AIR 1976 SC 49 : (1976) 1 SCR 847] clearly turned on the legal fiction contained in Section 18 (4) (b) of the Act and the death of the large landholder Teja during the pendency of the appeal before the Financial Commissioner on which inheritance opened and his legal heirs became small landholders, could not impair the vested rights acquired by the tenants by virtue of the order passed by the Prescribed Authority and the deposit by them of the first instalment of the purchase price as required under Section 18 (4)(a)."

Precedent Referred : 298. While on the ambit of the saving clause we may notice Bansidhar v. State of Rajasthan(1989) 2 SCC 557 while dealing with the fact of saving clause in a repealing statute the court held as follows:

Precedent Relied : "28. A saving provision in a repealing statute is not exhaustive of the rights and obligations so saved or the rights that survive the repeal. It is observed by this Court in IT Commissioner v. Shah Sadiq & Sons [(1987) 3 SCC 516 : 1987 SCC (Tax) 270 : AIR 1987 SC 1217, 1221] : (SCC p. 524, para 15)

Precedent Referred : 302. In Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd. (supra), by an amendment to the Delhi Rent Control Act, while a petition for eviction by the respondent landlord was pending on the ground of subletting, exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Rent Controller with respect of tenancies fetching monthly rent exceeding Rs. 3,500/- was brought into force. The question arose, inter alia, as to whether the ground of illegal subletting was a vested right. It also fell for decision as to whether there was merit in the contention of the appellant tenant that after the amendment, the civil court alone had jurisdiction. It was the contention of the tenant that he had no vested right and the amendment was not retrospective in operation, and therefore, the civil court alone would have jurisdiction. The landlord contended that in view of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, the pending proceedings before the Rent Controller should at any rate continue even if his contention based on vested right was repelled. This Court went on to hold that the tenant had no vested right by relying on the judgment of this court in Mohinder Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and another (1985) 4 SCC 221 and also in D. C. Bhatia and others v. Union of India and another (1995) 1 SCC 104 (the latter of which decisions is relied upon by the respondent-Union for the proposition that a right to take advantage of an enactment, would not create a vested right). Thereafter, this Court went on to hold that the landlord also did not have a vested right for seeking on the ground of eviction under Section 14 of the Delhi Rent Control Act. It was found that Section 14 was only a protective right for a tenant and the various clauses which constituted a proviso to the protection from eviction by a landlord could not be construed as a vested right in favour of the landlord. Having so held, this Court went on to consider the effect of a repeal of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act. Therein, this Court went on to hold that the respondent-landlord had a right to continue the proceedings before the Rent Control Board under Section 6 of the General Clauses Act. It would be an accrued right in terms of Section 6. We need only notice paragraphs-26, 35 and 36 of Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd.(supra):

Precedent Relied : 303. In Howrah Municipal Corporation and Others v. Ganges Rope Co. Ltd. and Others (2004) 1 SCC 663 the first respondent company had applied for sanction for construction of its complex of seven floors. By order dated 23.12.1993 the High Court directed sanction to be accorded for the plan up to the 4th floor provided other requirements are complied with. It was also observed that the company would be at liberty to seek further sanction if it was permissible. Sanction was given and construction completed as regards the four floors. Relying on the High Court order, sanction was sought for the remaining floors. The High Court passed an order expressing the expectation that the order would be passed within a period of four weeks relying upon the earlier order. There was correspondence between the parties. While the matter was so pending, the building rules were amended restricting the height of buildings, inter alia. The height being restricted, the application for sanction of additional three floors was rejected. The High Court took the view that the unamended rules and regulations on the date of submission of the application seeking sanction for further construction would govern the matter. This Court on a conspectus of the rules found that the rules did not contemplate 'deemed sanction' or 'deemed refusal', and therefore, without express sanction there could not be construction. The contention however, was that the order of the High court fixing a period to decide its pending application be treated as creating vested right in favour of the respondent. This court held as follows:

Precedent Referred : 304. In Arcelormittal India Private Limited v. Satish Kumar Gupta & Others (2019) 2 SCC 1, a judgment rendered by one of us (R.F. Nariman, J.), this Court dealt with the very Code with which we are concerned. It concerned the scope of Section 29A of the Code declaring ineligibility of certain categories of persons to be resolution applicants. In this context, this Court inter alia, while dealing with the scope of the Code as also the principle of piercing of corporate veil, and after an exhaustive survey of the Code and reiterating the principle that it is settled law that a statute is designed to be workable, a question was posed whether a resolution plan being turned down under Section 30(2) could be challenged. Answering this question, the Court held as follows:

Precedent Relied : "97. It is settled law that a statute is not retrospective merely because it affects existing rights; nor is it retrospective merely because a part of the requisites for its action is drawn from a time antecedent to its passing [see State Bank's Staff Union (Madras Circle) v. Union of India [State Bank's Staff Union (Madras Circle) v. Union of India, (2005) 7 SCC 584 : 2005 SCC (L&S) 994] (at para 21)]. In ArcelorMittal [ArcelorMittal (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta, (2019) 2 SCC 1], this Court has observed that a resolution applicant has no vested right for consideration or approval of its resolution plan as follows: (SCC p. 87, para 82)

Precedent Distinguished : 98. This being the case, it is clear that no vested right is taken away by application of Section 29-A. However, Shri Viswanathan pointed out the judgments in Ritesh Agarwal v. SEBI [Ritesh Agarwal v. SEBI, (2008) 8 SCC 205] (at para 25), K.S. Paripoornan v. State of Kerala [K.S. Paripoornan v. State of Kerala, (1994) 5 SCC 593] (at paras 60-66), Darshan Singh v. Ram Pal Singh [Darshan Singh v. Ram Pal Singh, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 191] (at para 35), Pyare Lal Sharma v. Jammu & Kashmir Industries Ltd. [Pyare Lal Sharma v. Jammu & Kashmir Industries Ltd., (1989) 3 SCC 448 : 1989 SCC (L&S) 484] (at para 21), P.D. Aggarwal v. State of U.P. [P.D. Aggarwal v. State of U.P., (1987) 3 SCC 622 : 1987 SCC (L&S) 310] (at para 18), and Govind Das v. CIT [Govind Das v. CIT, (1976) 1 SCC 906 : 1976 SCC (Tax) 133] (at paras 6 and 11), to argue that if a section operates on an antecedent set of facts, but affects a vested right, it can be held to be retrospective, and unless the legislature clearly intends such retrospectivity, the section should not be construed as such. Each of these judgments deals with different situations in which penal and other enactments interfere with vested rights, as a result of which, they were held to be prospective in nature. However, in our judgment in ArcelorMittal [ArcelorMittal (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta, (2019) 2 SCC 1], we have already held that resolution applicants have no vested right to be considered as such in the resolution process. Shri Mukul Rohatgi, however, argued that this judgment is distinguishable as no question of constitutional validity arose in this case, and no issue as to the vested right of a promoter fell for consideration. We are of the view that the observations made in ArcelorMittal [ArcelorMittal (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta, (2019) 2 SCC 1] directly arose on the facts of the case in order to oust the Ruias as promoters from the pale of consideration of their resolution plan, in which context, this Court held that they had no vested right to be considered as resolution applicants. Accordingly, we follow the aforesaid judgment. Since a resolution applicant who applies under Section 29-A(c) has no vested right to apply for being considered as a resolution applicant, this point is of no avail."

Precedent Relied : 306. We may observe that the decisions of this Court in Arcelormittal India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and Swiss Robbins (supra) are inappropriate to the context of the cases before us. We may also notice the decision of the Court of Appeal in West vs. Gwynne (1910) WLR 976. The plaintiff in the said case who was the landlord of the property wrote to the defendant, his tenant for his consent for the proposed underlease. The defendant insisted however on receiving for himself one half of the surplus rental as a condition for the consent. The suit filed by the plaintiff was for a declaration that the defendant could not impose such a condition and that he could give the underlease without any further consent of the defendant. In the year 1892 (after the lease), section 3 of the Conveyancing Act 1892 was enacted. The question which arose was whether it would apply to existing leases as well as and was of general application or it should be confined to leases after the commencement of the Act. The said section provided that in all leases containing a covenant against assigning or under letting without license or consent such covenant should unless the lease contain an express provision to the contrary be deemed subject to the proviso that no fine shall be payable for or in respect of such license or consent. The court took the view that the words of the section was clear. In fact, we may profitably notice the words of Joyce, J. whose judgment was the subject matter of the appeal "the section with which we have to deal with in this case is quite plain to everyone but a lawyer". The court of appeal took the view that the provision was a general enactment based on ground of public policy, Cozens Hardy M.R. while agreeing with the general proposition that a statute is presumed not to have retrospective operation unless a contrary intention appears by express words or by necessary implication held as follows:

Precedent Referred : 308. Reliance has been placed on the judgment of this court in B.K. Educational Services Private Limited v. Parag Gupta and Associates (2019)11 SCC 633 which was rendered by one of us (R.F. Nariman, J.). By an amendment to the Code with effect from 6.6.2018 Section 238A was inserted by which the Limitation Act, 1963, was made applicable to the proceedings and appeals before the authorities including the appellate tribunal. The question which fell for decision was whether the Limitation Act 1963 would also apply in respect of application under Section 7 inter alia on and from the commencement of the Code on 1.12.2016 till the date of the amendment that is 6.6.2018. In answering this question, this court went on to hold that the CIRP can only be initiated either by a financial or operational creditor in relation to debts which have not become time barred. In the course of its judgment, this Court referred to the earlier judgment of this Court including the recent judgment of this Court in M.P. Steel Corporation v. Commissioner of Central Excise (2015) 7 SCC 58. In the said decision, this Court has relied upon the earlier judgment reported in Smt. Shanti Misra (supra) wherein it was laid down inter alia as follows:

Precedent Relied : 312. However, we must consider whether a right of suit is conferred by a statute. In this regard, we may notice the decision of this Court in Mardia Chemicals Ltd. and others v. Union of India and others (2004) 4 SCC 311. Therein the validity of certain provisions of the SARFAESI Act 2002, was questioned. Of relevance to us, in these cases is the discussion of this Court relating to the vires of Section 17(2). The said provision contemplated a pre-deposit of 75 per cent of the amount by the applicant under Section 17 before the Tribunal. This Court found the condition of pre-deposit arbitrary and unreasonable. In this context, this court also noted the distinction between a civil suit and an appeal and it was found that an application maintained under section 17 was in the nature of a suit, it is apposite that we notice the following:

Precedent Relied : "59. We may like to observe that proceedings under Section 17 of the Act, in fact, are not appellate proceedings. It seems to be a misnomer. In fact it is the initial action which is brought before a forum as prescribed under the Act, raising grievance against the action or measures taken by one of the parties to the contract. It is the stage of initial proceeding like filing a suit in civil court. As a matter of fact proceedings under Section 17 of the Act are in lieu of a civil suit which remedy is ordinarily available but for the bar under Section 34 of the Act in the present case. We may refer to a decision of this Court in Ganga Bai v. Vijay Kumar [(1974) 2 SCC 393] where in respect of original and appellate proceedings a distinction has been drawn as follows: (SCC p. 397, para 15)

Precedent Referred : 317. In P.D. Aggrawal & others v. State of U.P and others. (1987) 3 SCC 622, the Court was dealing with a challenge to statutory rules, inter alia, by which temporary Assistant Engineers who were working continuously since the date of their appointment in the cadre of Assistant Engineer were deprived of their services from the date of substantial appointment to the temporary post for the purpose of seniority. This Court in the context of rules and the impact it had held as follows:

Precedent Referred : "18. It has been held by this Court in E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu [AIR 1974 SC 555, 583 : (1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 165], Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India [AIR 1978 SC 597, 624 : (1978) 1 SCC 248] that there should not be arbitrariness in State action and the State action must ensure fairness and equality of treatment. It is open to judicial review whether any rule or provision of any Act has violated the principles of equality and non-arbitrariness and thereby invaded the rights of citizens guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution...."

Precedent Relied : 319. In Darshan Singh v. Ram Pal Singh and Ors. 1992(Suppl)1 SCC 191, the appellants challenged certain alienations as being contrary to custom under the State law of the year 1920. The matter was at the appellate stage in suits filed by the appellants.

Precedent Referred : 322. In K.S. Paripoornan v. State of Kerala (1994) 5 SCC 593, the Constitution Bench had to consider whether Section 23 (I-A) and introduced by the amending Act 1984 was retrospective. In the majority judgement by S. C. Agrawal, J., we notice the following:

Precedent Relied : 323. In State Bank's Staff Union (Madras Circle) v. Union of India and others AIR 2005 SC 3446 / (2005) 7 SCC 584, an award was passed by the Industrial Tribunal, which was impugned before the High Court. When the matter was so pending, the State Bank of India Act came to be amended. The contention of the appellants was that the amendment was intended to nullify the decision of the High Court, which was repelled. The Court also considered the power of the sovereign Legislature to make retrospective legislation. The Court held as follows:

Precedent Relied : 26. The above passage was quoted with approval by the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of Asstt. Commr. of Urban Land Tax v. Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd. [(1969) 2 SCC 55] In considering the question as to whether the legislative power to amend a provision with retrospective operation has been reasonably exercised or not, various factors have to be considered. It was observed in the case of Stott v. Stott Realty Co. [284 NW 635] as noted in Words and Phrases, Permanent Edn., Vol. 37-A, p. 2250 that:

Precedent Referred : 326. Further, the appeal to invoke the principle of reading down the proviso is untenable. In his judgment for the majority Sawant, J. in Delhi Transport Corpn. v. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress(1991) Suppl.(1) SCC 600 held as follows:

Precedent Referred : 328. We may also notice the judgment of this Court in Vijay v. State of Maharashtra (2006) 6 SCC 289. The appellant was elected as a member of the Panchayat in 2000 and elected as the Sarpanch. He was further elected as Councillor of the Zila Parishad. An amendment was made with effect from 8.8.2003. Under the marginal note Disqualifications, Section 14, inter alia, disentitled a person from continuing as a Panchayat Member if he was elected a Councillor of the Zila Parishad. This Court found that it was a disqualifying law intended to have retrospective effect. We may notice para 12 which reads as follows:

