Precedent Relied : (xviii) that even the government in discharge of executive functions and providing administrative response have to act as "parens patriae" which doctrine is embedded in the preamble of the Constitution. It is submitted that the government in democracy or any other government has to act only and only for the welfare of the people. In support of his submission, reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of India, (1990) 1 SCC 613 (paragraph 35).

Precedent Referred : It is submitted that therefore when the doctrine of parens patriae gets attracted, the lack of resources or financial considerations resulting in denial of relief to the needy persons affected by disaster is no answer and cannot be pressed into service. It is submitted that the government is simply bound to arrange its coffers in such a manner that the relief cannot be denied. Reliance is placed upon the decision of this Court in the case of Union Carbide Corporation Limited v. Union of India, (1991) 4 SCC 584;

Precedent Referred : (xix) that the bogey of financial burden and stress on the banks to drive them unviable is raised without any basis on record much less based on empirical study and collection of relevant data which is the basic requirement particularly of rule of law. On the duty of undertaking empirical study based on collection of relevant and quantifiable data, reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Kailash Chand Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, (2002) 6 SCC 562; and the decision of the Constitution Bench judgment in the case of M. Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006) 8 SCC 212 (paragraphs 44 to 46);

Precedent Referred : (xxviii) that the impugned classification is based on whims and caprice of the executive rather than an objective and real consideration. No material is available on record to show the basis of the classification. The Union of India cannot seek to clothe a decision which is so evidently discriminatory and arbitrary under the protective shield of policy decision inasmuch as any policy can neither be arbitrary nor discriminatory. In support of his submissions, Shri Ravindra Shrivastava has heavily relied upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of Rattan Arya v. State of T.N. (1986) 3 SCC 385; State of W.B. v. Anwar Ali Sarkar 1952 SCR 284: AIR 1952 SC 75 (paras 83 & 84); and D.S. Nakara v. Union of India, (1983) 1 SCC 305 (paras 13 & 14);

Precedent Relied : (xxix) that even within the class of classified eligible borrowers, the arbitrariness is writ large because categories and the borrowers of each categories are inherently dissimilar but are sought to be painted with one brush. They are made to wear the shoes of one size to fit in all. The borrowers in 8 categories compared with each other unequal. For example, a business loan to MSME category is considered at par with home loan and educational loan. The conditions of the loans and interests are bound to be different so much so the credit card holders and consumer durable loans and automobile loans are inherently dissimilar, also the personal loans to professional and the MSME loans are different in content. It is submitted that thus unequals are being treated as equals which itself is a case of classic discrimination. Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Roop Chandra Adlakha v. Delhi Development Authority, 1989 Supp. (1) SCC 116 (paras 19 & 20);

Precedent Relied : (xxxviii) that the very nature of the issues involved in this case and of which cognizance is required to be taken are such that there is an eminent need in public interest of continuous monitoring of the statutory and executive action by this Court and further issuance of continuous directions and mandamus to all the authorities concerned. It is submitted that neither the magnitude and severity of the disaster which has continuous and cascading effect and considering the very concept of "disaster management" under the Act as an integrated and continuous process, the relief and measures adopted or required to be adopted cannot be a sort of one-time grant or package. It is submitted that with the evolution of situation there is a strong public interest and need for this Court to keep exercising its constitutional jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution so that the authorities do not fail, they remain active and vigilant and enormous class of victims of the disaster do not remain crying for the redressal of the grievances. In support of his submission, heavy reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of T.N. Godavarman Thirumulkpad v. Union of India (1997) 2 SCC 267.

Precedent Relied : In support of above, Shri Mehta, learned Solicitor General has relied upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of Pradip Kumar Maity v. Chinmoy Kumar Bhunia (2013) 11 SCC 122 (para 6); Chinnamarkathian v. Ayyavoo (1982) 1 SCC 159 (paras 24 to 26); Official Liquidator v. Dharti Dhan (P) Ltd. (1977) 2 SCC 166 (paras 7 to 10); Bachahan Devi v. Nagar Nigam, Gorakhpur (2008) 12 SCC 372 (para 18); Delhi Administration v. Umrao Singh (2012) 1 SCC 194 (para 13); and Union of India v. Kumho Petrochemicals Co. Ltd. (2017) 8 SCC 307 (paras 34 &35).

Precedent Relied : 7.25 It is submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Solicitor General that the packages/reliefs offered by the Central Government/RBI/Lenders are in the realm of policy decisions. It is submitted that a conscious decision has been taken after considering every pros and cons and considering various factors and the priorities in the larger public interest and the economy of the country. It is submitted that as observed and held by this Court in the case of Arun Kumar Agrawal v. Union of India (2013) 7 SCC 1 that the matters relating to economic issues, have always an element of trial and error and so long as a trial and error is bona fide and with best intentions, such decisions cannot be questioned as arbitrary, capricious or illegal. It is submitted that in the aforesaid decision in paragraph 43, this Court has considered the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in the case of Metropolis Theatre Co. v. Chicago, which took the view that the problems of Government are practical ones and may justify, if they do not require, rough accommodation, illogical, if may be, and unscientific. Mere errors of Government are not subject to our judicial review. It is only its palpably arbitrary exercises which can be declared void. Shri Mehta has heavily relied upon paragraphs 41 to 49 of the aforesaid decision, in which this Court considered various earlier decisions.

Precedent Relied : 7.25.1 Relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. v. RBI, (1992) 2 SCC 343, it is submitted that as observed by this Court the function of the Court is to see that lawful authority is not abused but not to appropriate to itself the task entrusted to that authority. It is further observed that the Courts are not to interfere with economic policy which is the function of experts. It is not the function of the courts to sit in judgment over matters of economic policy and it must necessarily be left to the expert bodies. It is submitted that it is further observed that the functions of the Court are not to advise in matters relating to financial and economic policies for which bodies like RBI are fully competent. It is further observed that the Court can only strike down some or entire directions issued by the RBI in case the Court is satisfied that the directions were wholly unreasonable or violative of any provisions of the Constitution or any statute. He has relied upon paragraphs 31, 37 and 38 of the aforesaid decision.

Precedent Referred : 7.25.2 It is further submitted that in the case of Federation of Railway Officers Association v. Union of India (2003) 4 SCC 289, it is observed that on matters affecting policy and requiring technical expertise the court would leave the matter for decision of those who are qualified to address the issues.

Precedent Relied : 7.25.3 It is further submitted that in the case of Dhampur Sugar (Kashipur) Ltd. v. State of Uttaranchal, (2007) 8 SCC 418, it is observed by this Court that it is well established that courts are ill-equipped to deal with the policy matters. It is further observed that in complex social, economic and commercial matters, decisions have to be taken by governmental authorities keeping in view several factors and it is not possible for courts to consider competing claims and conflicting interests and to conclude which way the balance tilts. It is submitted that it is further observed that the court cannot strike down a policy decision taken by the Government merely because it feels that another policy decision would have been fairer or wiser or more scientific or logical. The court can interfere only if the policy decision is patently arbitrary, discriminatory or mala fide.

Precedent Referred : 7.25.4 On exercise of judicial review, Shri Mehta, learned Solicitor General has relied upon the following decisions of this Court, Arun Kumar Agrawal (supra); State of M.P. v. Nandlal Jaiswal, (1986) 4 SCC 566; BALCO Employees' Union (Regd.) v. Union of India, (2002) 2 SCC 333; Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. (supra); Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd. v. Union of India (1996) 10 SCC 104; Villianur Iyarkkai Padukappu Maiyam v., Union of India (2009) 7 SCC 561; Narmada Bachao Andolan v. Union of India, (2000) 10 SCC 664; and R.K. Garg v. Union of India (1981) 4 SCC 675.

Precedent Relied : 9.3 It is submitted that this Court in a number of decisions have held that the courts are not to interfere with the economic policy which is the function of experts. It is not the function of the courts to sit in judgment over matters of economic policy and it must necessarily be left to the expert bodies. It is submitted that even in such matters even experts can seriously and doubtlessly differ. Courts cannot be expected to decide them without even the aid of experts. In support of his submission, Shri V. Giri, learned Senior Advocate has relied upon the following decisions, Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. (supra); Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. V. Union of India (1990) 3 SCC 223; Prag Ice & Oil Mills v. Union of India AIR 1978 SC 1296; and P.T.R. Exports (Madras) P. Ltd. V. Union of India (1996) 5 SCC 268.

Precedent Relied : 14.2 In the case of Arun Kumar Agrawal (supra), this Court had an occasion to consider the following observations made the Supreme Court of the United States in the case of Metropolis Theatre Co. v. Chicago, 57 L Ed 730: 228 US 61 (1913):

