Precedent Relied : "I ask no favour for my sex. All I ask of our brethren is that they take their feet off our necks" Late Justice Ginsburg quoted Sara Grimke, noted abolitionist and advocate of equal rights of men and women, while arguing before the Supreme Court of the United States of America in Sharron A. Frontiero and Joseph Frontiero v. Elliot L. Richardson, Secretary of Defense, et al., 411 U.S 677.

Precedent Relied : 1. By the judgment of this Court in Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. Babita Puniya "Babita Puniya", (2020) 7 SCC 469, the claim of women engaged on Short Service Commissions "SSCs" in the Indian Army for seeking Permanent Commission "PC" was evaluated and held to be justified. Addressing the background of the dispute, the judgment described this as "a quest for equality of opportunity for women seeking PCs". As the Court observed, "a decade and more spent in litigation, women engaged on Short Service Commissions in the Army seek parity with their male counterparts". The battle for equality has been long drawn, engaging as much with reforming mindsets as with implementing constitutional principles.

Precedent Relied : (v) The necessary steps including release of financial benefits shall be done by the authorities within two (2) months of passing of this order." formed the subject matter of the earlier proceedings before this Court which resulted in the decision in Babita Puniya (supra) being rendered on 17 February 2020. Between 12 March 2010, when the Delhi High Court pronounced its judgment, and 17 February 2020, when this Court rendered its decision in Babita Puniya (supra), there was no stay of the implementation of the judgment of the Delhi High Court. This, as a matter of fact, was clarified on 2 September 2011 in an order of this Court The order of this Court in Ministry of Defence v. Babita Puniya, 2011 SCC OnLine SC 87 provides as follows:

Precedent Relied : What is stayed as interim measure by this Court is action of contempt initiated by the original writ petitioners against the petitioners in special leave petitions. The operation of the impugned judgment [Babita Puniya v. Ministry of Defence, 2010 SCC OnLine Del 1116 : (2010) 168 DLT 115] is not stayed at all.".

Precedent Relied : (ii) We affirm the clarification which has been issued in sub-para (i) of Para 61 of the impugned judgment [Babita Puniya v. Ministry of Defence, 2010 SCC OnLine Del 1116 : (2010) 168 DLT 115] and order of the Delhi High Court.

Precedent Referred : (i) A writ petition under Article 32 is not maintainable for reliefs sought in service matters. The petitioners should have approached the Armed Forces Tribunal with their statutory grievance as has been held by this Court in Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Orissa and Ors. (1983) 2 SCC 433 (this submission in the counter has not been pressed during the hearing);

Precedent Relied : (xx) The decision of this Court in Brig. Nalin Kumar Bhatia v. Union of India Civil Appeal No 5629 of 2017 decided on 11 February 2020 on the inapplicability of value judgement by the Selection Board was premised on its peculiar set of facts where the officer there was the sole person in the batch to be considered for a promotion. The case was not an indictment of policies of inter se merit;

Precedent Relied : 43. Under the formal and symmetric conception of antidiscrimination law, all that the law requires is that likes be treated alike. Equality, under this conception, has no substantive underpinnings. It is premised on the notion that fairness demands consistency in treatment. Sandra Fredman, DISCRIMINATION LAW (Oxford University Press, 2nd edition)2011 at p.8 ("Sandra Fredman, Discrimination Law") Under this analysis, the fact that some protected groups are disproportionately and adversely impacted by the operation of the concerned law or its practice, makes no difference. An apt illustration of this phenomenon would be the United States' Supreme Court's judgment in Washington v. Davis 426 U.S. 229 (1976), which held that a facially neutral qualifying test was not violative of the equal protection guarantee contained in the 14th Amendment of the American Constitution merely because African-Americans disproportionately failed the test.

Precedent Relied : 45. Indirect discrimination is closely tied to the substantive conception of equality outlined above. The doctrine of substantive equality and anti-stereotyping has been a critical evolution of the Indian constitutional jurisprudence on Article 14 and 15(1). The spirit of these tenets have been endorsed in a consistent line of authority by this Court. To illustrate, in Anuj Garg v. Hotel Association of India (2008) 3 SCC 1, this Court held that laws premised on sex-based stereotypes are constitutionally impermissible, in that they are outmoded in content and stifling in means. The Court further held that no law that ends up perpetuating the oppression of women could pass scrutiny. Barriers that prevent women from enjoying full and equal citizenship, it was held, must be dismantled, as opposed to being cited to validate an unjust status quo. In National Legal Services Authority v. Union of India (2014) 5 SCC 438, this Court recognized how the patterns of discrimination and disadvantage faced by the transgender community and enumerated a series of remedial measures that can be taken for their empowerment. In Jeeja Ghosh v. Union of India (2016) 7 SCC 761 and Vikash Kumar v. Union Public Service Commission 2021 SCC OnLine SC 84 this Court recognized reasonable accommodation as a substantive equality facilitator.

Precedent Relied : 46. The jurisprudence relating to indirect discrimination in India is still at a nascent stage. Having said that, indirect discrimination has found its place in the jurisprudence of this Court in Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India (2018) 10 SCC 1, paras 442-446, where one of us (Chandrachud J), in holding Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code as unconstitutional insofar as it decriminalizes homosexual intercourse amongst consenting adults, drew on the doctrine of indirect discrimination. This was in arriving at the conclusion that this facially neutral provision disproportionately affected members of the LGBT community. This reliance was in affirmation of the decision of the Delhi High Court in Naz Foundation v. Government of NCT of Delhi (2009) 111 DRJ 1 (DB) which had relied on the 'Declaration of Principles of Equality' issued by the Equal Rights Trust Act in 2008 in recognizing that indirect discrimination occurs "when a provision, criterion or practice would put persons having a status or a characteristic associated with one or more prohibited grounds at a particular disadvantage compared with other persons, unless that provision, criterion or practice is objectively justified by a legitimate aim, and the means of achieving that aim are appropriate and necessary." Id. at para 93 Similarly, this Court has recognized the fashion in which discrimination operates by dint of "structures of oppression and domination" which prevent certain groups from enjoying the full panoply of entitlements. Indian Young Lawyers Assn. v. State of Kerala, 2018 SCC OnLine SC 1690, (Chandrachud J., concurring opinion, paragraph 117); Joseph Shine v. Union of India, 2018 SC OnLine SC 1676, (Chandrachud J, concurring opinion, para 38) ("Joseph Shine") The focus in antidiscrimination enquiry, has switched from looking at the intentions or motive of the discriminator to examining whether a rule, formally or substantively, "contributes to the subordination of a disadvantaged group of individuals" Ibid, Joseph Shine.

Precedent Referred : 47. Indirect discrimination has also been recognized by the High Courts in India Patel Suleman Gaibi v. State of Maharashtra, 2014 SCC OnLine Bom 4639. For instance, in the matters of public sector employment, the Delhi High Court in Inspector (Mahila) Ravina v. Union of India Writ Petition (C) 4525 of 2014, Delhi High Court (6 August 2015) and in Madhu v. Northern Railways "Madhu", 2018 SCC OnLine Del 6660. A challenge to conditions of employment/promotion in the Army Dental Corps was also made before the Delhi High Court in Dr. Jacqueline Jacinta Dias & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors., (2018 SCC OnLine Del 12426). However, the challenge could not succeed as the Court failed to discern any manifest bias. In doing so however, the High Court pointed out to the lack of clear norms regarding indirect discrimination in India and noted:

Precedent Referred : "20. This Court itself has recognised that actions taken on a seemingly innocent ground can in fact have discriminatory effects due to the structural inequalities that exist between classes. When the CRPF denied promotion to an officer on the ground that she did not take the requisite course to secure promotion, because she was pregnant, the Delhi High Court struck down the action as discriminatory. Such actions would inherently affect women more than men. The Court in Inspector (Mahila) Ravina v. Union of India W.P.(C) 4525/2014 stated,

Precedent Relied : 52. Another excellent formulation of the doctrine can be found in the opinion of Advocate General Maduro of the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU). He notes that the distinctive attribute of direct discrimination is that the discriminator explicitly relies on a suspect classification (prohibited ground of discrimination) to act in a certain way. Such classification serves as an essential premise of the discriminator's reasoning. On the other hand, in indirect discrimination, the intention of the discriminator, and the reasons for his actions are irrelevant. He pertinently observes: "In fact, this is the whole point of the prohibition of indirect discrimination: even neutral, innocent or good faith measures and policies adopted with no discriminatory intent whatsoever will be caught if their impact on persons who have a particular characteristic is greater than their impact on other persons." Coleman v. Attridge Law, [2008] IRLR 722.

Precedent Relied : 54. The genesis of the doctrine can be traced to the celebrated United States Supreme Court judgment in Griggs v. Duke Power Co "Griggs", 401 US 424, 431 (1971). The issue concerned manual work for which the prescribed qualifications included the possession of a high school education and satisfactory results in an aptitude test. Two facts about the case bear emphasis. First, due to the inferior quality of segregated school education, African-American candidates were disqualified in higher numbers because of the aforementioned requirements than their white counterparts. Second, neither of these two requirements was shown to be significantly related to successful job performance.

Precedent Relied : 56. In 2005, in Smith v. City of Jackson 544 US 228 (2005), the US Supreme Court construed statutory language in The Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 1967 which proscribed actions which "otherwise adversely affect" an employee. This was read to include disparate impact liability. The Court held that this phrase "focuses on the effects of the action on the employee rather than the motivation for the action of the employer."

Precedent Relied : 57. The third major case on disparate impact liability decided by the US Supreme Court was in 2015, concerning the Fair Housing Act which the Court interpreted as including disparate impact liability.Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs v. Inclusive Communities Project Inc, 135 S Ct 2411 [2015], per Kennedy J The Court also made instructive observations on the burden of proof that a plaintiff espousing a claim of disparate impact on the basis of statistical disparity must discharge. It held that the plaintiff must be able to establish that the defendant's policy is the cause of the disparity. The Court noted: "A robust causality requirement [...] protects defendants from being liable for racial disparities they did not create. "Id. at para 20 On the standard of justification for rebutting such a claim, the Court held that courts must assess claims of disparate impact liability with caution so that defendants are provided reasonable margin for devising requisite policies that are tailored for their work requirement.

Precedent Referred : "Direct and indirect discrimination are mutually exclusive. You cannot have both at once... The main difference between them is that direct discrimination cannot be justified. Indirect discrimination can be justified if it is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim." R (on the application of E) v. JFS Governing Body, [2009] UKSC 15, para 57

Precedent Relied : 60. An instructive judgment of the UK Supreme Court for us is Essop v. Home Office (UK Border Agency) [2017] UKSC 27. At issue was the allegedly disproportionate impact of an exam called the Core Skills Assessment, to secure public sector employment and promotion in civil services, on "black and minority ethnic (BME)" and older candidates. The Court noted the statistical disparity in the following terms:

Precedent Referred : (5) Discrimination on one or more of the grounds listed in subsection (3) is unfair unless it is established that the discrimination is fair." prohibits indirect discrimination. The judicial exegesis of indirect discrimination can first be found in the judgment of the South African Constitutional Court "SACC" in the case of City Council of Pretoria v. Walker (1998) 3 BCLR 257, paras 31-32 in which the Court expounded on the doctrine in the following terms:

Precedent Referred : 63. In a recent judgment in Mahlangu and Another v. Minister of Labour [2020] ZACC 24, the SACC had to rule on the constitutionality of Section 1(xix)(v) of the Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act. This provision explicitly excluded domestic workers from the definition of employees under the Act. This had the consequence of depriving domestic workers access to the social security benefits contained in the legislation, in the event of injury, disablement and death. The SACC, inter alia, returned a finding that the provision was hit by the constitutional prohibition on indirect discrimination. This was for the reason that domestic workers are predominantly black women. As a result, held the Court: "This means discrimination against them constitutes indirect discrimination on the basis of race, sex and gender."

Precedent Relied : 64. In Ontario Human Rights Commission v. Simpsons-Sears "Ontario HRC", [1985] 2 SCR 53, the Canadian Supreme Court expounded the doctrine of indirect discrimination (what it called adverse effects discrimination), while entertaining a challenge under Section 4(1)(g) of the Ontario Human Rights Code Section 4(1)(g) of the Ontario Human Rights Code prohibited discrimination against an employee with regards to any term or condition of employment on the basis of race, creed, colour, sex, age etc.. In analyzing whether a work policy mandating inflexible working hours on Friday evenings and Saturdays indirectly discriminated against the Appellant on the basis of her creed, in that her religion required her to strictly observe the Sabbath, the Court noted:

Precedent Relied : 65. The principles laid down in Ontario HRC (supra) were consistently applied by the courts in Canada to protect indirect discrimination. In a recent judgment in Fraser v. Canada (Attorney General) ("Fraser"), 2020 SCC 28, the Canadian Supreme Court was called on to determine the constitutionality of a rule categorizing job-sharing positions as "part-time work" for which participants could not receive full-time pension. Under the job-sharing programme, optees for the programme could split the duties and responsibilities of one full-time position. A large majority of the optees for the job-sharing programme were women, who found it burdensome to carry out the responsibilities of work and domestic work and were particularly hit by the new rule as they would lose out on pension benefits. The Court recognized indirect discrimination as a legal response to the fact that discrimination is "frequently a product of continuing to do things the way they have always been done", as opposed to intentionally discriminatory actions. Id. at para 31 Pertinently, the Court outlined a 2-step test for conducting an indirect discrimination enquiry. First, the Court has to enquire whether the impugned rule disproportionately affects a particular group. As an evidentiary matter, this entails a consideration of material that demonstrates that "membership in the claimant group is associated with certain characteristics that have disadvantaged members of the group". However, as such evidence might be hard to come by, reliance can be placed on evidence generated by the claimant group itself. Further, while statistical evidence can serve as concrete proof of disproportionate impact, there is no clear quantitative threshold as to the quantum of disproportionality to be established for a charge of indirect discrimination to be brought home. Equally, recognizing the importance of applying a robust judicial common sense, the Court held: "In some cases, evidence about a group will show such a strong association with certain traits-such as pregnancy with gender-that the disproportionate impact on members of that group will be apparent and immediate".Id. at paras 50-72 Second, the Court has to look at whether the law has the effect of reinforcing, perpetuating, or exacerbating disadvantage. Such disadvantage could be in the shape of: "[e]conomic exclusion or disadvantage, [s]ocial exclusion...[p]sychological harms...[p]hysical harms...[or] [p]olitical exclusion", and must be viewed in light of any systemic or historical disadvantages faced by the claimant group." Id. at para 76

Precedent Relied : 68. Third, on the nature of evidence required to prove indirect discrimination, statistical evidence that can establish how the impugned provision, criteria or practice is the cause for the disproportionately disadvantageous outcome can be one of the ways to establish the play of indirect discrimination. As Professor Sandra Fredman notes, "Aptitude tests, interview and selection processes, and other apparently scientific and neutral measures might never invite scrutiny unless data is available to dislodge these assumptions." Sandra Fredman, Discrimination Law (supra n. 28) at p. 187 Consistent with the Canadian Supreme Court's approach in Fraser (supra), we do not think that it would be wise to lay down any quantitative thresholds for the nature of statistical disparity that must be established for a claimant to succeed. Equally, we do not think that an absolutist position can be adopted as to the nature of evidence that must be brought forth to succeed in a case of indirect discrimination. The absence of any statistical evidence or inability to statistically demonstrate exclusion cannot be the sole ground for debunking claims of indirect discrimination. This was clarified by the European Court of Human Rights in a case concerning fifteen Croatians of Roma origin claiming racial discrimination and segregation in schools with Roma-only classes. In assessing the claims of the fifteen Croatians, the court observed that indirect discrimination can be proved without statistical evidence Orsus and others v. Croatia, [2010] ECHR 337, para 153. Therefore, statistical evidence demonstrating patterns of exclusion, can be one of the ways to prove indirect discrimination.

Precedent Relied : 74. The Supreme Court of Canada, in Action Travail des Femmes v. Canadian National Railway Company "Canadian National Railway Company", (1987) 1 S.C.R. 1114 analyzed the claim of woman seeking equal employment opportunities in the National Railroad Company. In echoing the mutually reinforcing consequences of direct and indirect discrimination within organizational structures as a systemic feature, the Court noted Id. at 1139:

Precedent Relied : This framework provided in Canadian National Railway Company (supra) was followed by the Human Rights Tribunal of Canada, in the case of National Capital Alliance on Race Relations v. Canada (Health and Welfare) 1997 28 C.H.R.R.D/179 (Canadian Human Rights Tribunal), wherein the Court had to examine a case against the Health and Welfare Department of Canada for discriminating against visible minorities by establishing employment policies and practices that deprive visible minorities (race, colour and ethnic origin) of employment opportunities in senior management. The Court conducted a holistic analysis of the organization by collating testimonies of workers in the organization and by engaging experts on statistical analysis and human resource management. The evidence of the expert on human resources was analysed to situate systemic issues ranging from ghettoization of minorities in Canada translating into lesser encouragement for professional ambition. Societal impact of discrimination was evidenced in the informal staffing decisions providing fertile ground for unconscious bias and a broader perception of visible minorities as unfit for management. In upholding the claims of the plaintiffs, corrective measures were prescribed to counteract the effects of systemic discrimination in the workforce.

Precedent Relied : 75. In the United States, the Supreme Court analysed a Title VII claim of workers (represented by the Government) in a trucking company alleging pattern and practice of employment discrimination against "Negroes and Spanish-surnamed Americans" by failing to place them equally with whites in long-distance, line-driver positions International Brotherhood of Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 324 (1977). The Court noted certain legal principles that could govern a claim of systemic disparate treatment and used a mixture of statistical patterns with worker testimonies to arrive at a conclusion of systemic discrimination:

Precedent Relied : "Consideration of the question whether the company engaged in a pattern or practice of discriminatory hiring practices involves controlling legal principles that are relatively clear. The Government's theory of discrimination was simply that the company, in violation of s 703(a) of Title VII, 14 regularly and purposefully treated Negroes and Spanish-surnamed Americans less favorably than white persons....The ultimate factual issues are thus simply whether there was a pattern or practice of such disparate treatment and, if so, whether the differences were "racially premised."... As the plaintiff, the Government bore the initial burden of making out a prima facie case of discrimination. Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 425, 95 S.Ct. 2362, 2375, 45 L.Ed.2d 280; McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, supra, 411 U.S., at 802, 93 S.Ct., at 1824. And, because it alleged a systemwide pattern or practice of resistance to the full enjoyment of Title VII rights, the Government ultimately had to prove more than the mere occurrence of isolated or "accidental" or sporadic discriminatory acts. It had to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that racial discrimination was the company's standard operating procedure the regular rather than the unusual practice.... The Government bolstered its statistical evidence with the testimony of individuals who recounted over 40 specific instances of discrimination. Upon the basis of this testimony the District Court found that "(n)umerous qualified black and Spanish-surnamed American applicants who sought line driving jobs at the company over the years, either had their requests ignored, were given false or misleading information about requirements, opportunities, and application procedures, or were not considered and hired on the same basis that whites were considered and hired." Minority employees who wanted to transfer to line-driver jobs met with similar difficulties. The company's principal response to this evidence is that statistics can never in and of themselves prove the existence of a pattern or practice of discrimination, or even establish a prima facie case shifting to the employer the burden of rebutting the inference raised by the figures. But, as even our brief summary of the evidence shows, this was not a case in which the Government relied on "statistics alone." The individuals who testified about their personal experiences with the company brought the cold numbers convincingly to life." Id.at p. 334-340

Precedent Referred : (vii) In IA 12148 of 2020 in Writ Petition (C) 1172 of 2020 (Lt. Col. Sonia Anand v. Union of India), a detailed chart has been annexed indicating illustrations of women achievers who have been denied PC. At the cost of enlarging the size of this judgment, it becomes necessary to highlight the tabulated statement. The facts which have been set-forth before the Court have not been denied during the course of the submissions of the ASG :

Precedent Relied : 110. We also must express our anguish at the respondents' failure to implement the judgment rendered by the Delhi High Court in 2010, whose operation was specifically not stayed by this Court in 2011. The conundrum on the applicability of the medical criterion to WSSCOs who are 40-50 years old, has arisen only because of the Army not having implemented its decision in time, despite the course correction prescribed by the Delhi High Court in 2010. The WSSCOs, a few of whom are petitioners before us today, have persevered for over a decade to gain the same dignity of an equal opportunity at PC. The fact that only around 35 women who are otherwise fit for PC, and 31 women who do not qualify in addition to not meeting the medical criteria, is irrelevant in determining whether each of these women is entitled to equality of opportunity in matters of public employment under Article 16(1) and (2). As observed by a 9 judge bench of this Court in Justice KS Puttaswamy v. Union of India, (2017) 10 SCC 1 a de minimis rationale is not a permissible exception to invasion of fundamental rights. The Court, speaking through one of us (Chandrachud, J.) had held that "the de minimis hypothesis is misplaced because the invasion of a fundamental right is not rendered tolerable when a few, as opposed to a large number of persons, are subjected to hostile treatment." Id. at para 128 Similarly, the percentage of women who have suffered as a consequence of the belated application of rigorous medical criteria is irrelevant to the determination of whether it is a violation of Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution.

Precedent Referred : 114. The petitioners in Lt. Col. Reena Gairola v. Union of India Writ Petition (Civil) No. 34 of 2021 and in Major Nilam Gorwade v. Union of India Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1223 of 2020 belong to the group of women officers recruited under the WSES(O)- 27 to 31 and SSCW(T&NT) 1 to 3. These petitioners were commissioned on or after March 2006 and had not completed 14 years of service as on the date of the judgment in Babita Puniya (supra). Under the directions in Babita Puniya (supra), in case they do not opt for PC or opt for PC and are not granted PC, they will be released at the end of their 14 years of contractual service. The petitioners in these batches would neither be entitled to pension as they would have only completed 14 years of service at the end of their contract, nor would they be given the one time relief granted in Babita Puniya (supra) of entitlement to continue in service for 20 years.

