Statute : 38. Sub-section (2) of Section 21 stipulates that the CoC is to comprise of all financial creditors of the corporate debtor. The first proviso to Sub-section (2) has been amended by Act 26 of 2018 with effect from 6 June 2018. Having held that AAA and Spade are not financial creditors, NCLT came to the conclusion that they were not entitled to inclusion in the CoC.

Legislation : (ii) the expressions, "allottee" and "real estate project" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (d) and (zn) of section 2 of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 (16 of 2016);]

Statute : 59. The term 'related party' has also been defined by Parliament in the Companies Act, 2013 for all corporations. The definition of the expression has also been expanded for listed entities by the Securities Exchange Board of India by amendment to the Equity Listing Agreement to include elements mentioned under applicable accounting standards. However, in the present case, we are assessing its definition only under the IBC, which is exhaustive. The purpose of defining the term separately under different statutes is not to avoid inconsistency but because the purpose of each of them is different. Hence, while understanding the meaning of 'related party' in the context of the IBC, it is important to keep in mind that it was defined to ensure that those entities which are related to the Corporate Debtor can be identified clearly, since their presence can often negatively affect the insolvency process.

Statute : 79. The language was subsequently amended by the Amendment Act, 2018 and at present the first proviso reads as follows:

Statute : 86. In this context, it would be useful to refer to an earlier decision of this Court in Abhay Singh Chautala vs C.B.I. (2011) 7 SCC 141, where the court did not interpret the word "is" in praesenti because that would lead to an absurd result, defeating the purpose of the concerned provision. In that case this Court had to interpret Section 19(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, which provided:

