Statute : 9. Shri Rohatgi further submitted, that as held by this Court in Innoventive Industries Ltd. vs. ICICI Bank & Anr. (2018) 1 SCC 407, I&B Code is a complete code in itself. He submitted, that Section 61(2) of the I&B Code provides, that the decision of the Adjudicating Authority (i.e. NCLT) may be challenged before NCLAT within 30 days. He submitted, that an appeal would be tenable within a further period of 15 days, only when NCLAT comes to a satisfaction, that there was a sufficient cause for not filing the appeal within a period of 30 days. He submitted, that since the I&B Code is a complete Code, neither Section 5 nor Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as "the Limitation Act") would be applicable. He submitted, that the judgment of NCLT was delivered on 28.11.2019; certified copies of the same were made available to KIAL on 18.12.2019; and appeals came to be filed on 18.2.2020. He submitted, even if KIAL was given the benefit of the period of 20 days for obtaining the certified copies, still the appeals ought to have been filed on 65th day from the order of NCLT. It would be somewhere on 1st/2nd February, 2020. However, the appeals were filed on 18.2.2020. He submitted, that the litigant like KIAL, which has a team of legal experts at its disposal cannot be heard to say, that they were not aware of the alternate remedy and had bona fide filed the writ petition before the High Court. He submitted, that KIAL is not entitled to the benefit of the exclusion of period between 11.12.2019 i.e. the date of filing of the writ petition and 28.1.2020 i.e. the date of dismissal of the writ petition by the High Court. He submitted, that provisions of Section 14 of the Limitation Act would not at all be applicable and that NCLAT has totally erred in law, in entertaining the appeals which were ex facie beyond limitation.

Legislation : "61. Appeals and Appellate Authority.-(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained under the Companies Act, 2013, any person aggrieved by the order of the Adjudicating Authority under this part may prefer an appeal to the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal.

Legislation : "238-A. Limitation.-The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) shall, as far as may be, apply to the proceedings or appeals before the Adjudicating Authority, the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, the Debt Recovery Tribunal or the Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be."

Statute : 66. In the case of Popular Construction Co. (supra) this Court was considering the question as to whether the provisions of Section 5 of the Limitation Act are applicable to an application challenging an award under Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as "the Arbitration Act"). This Court observed thus:

Legislation : "14. Here the history and scheme of the 1996 Act support the conclusion that the time-limit prescribed under Section 34 to challenge an award is absolute and unex-tendible by court under Section 5 of the Limitation Act. The Arbitration and Con-ciliation Bill, 1995 which preceded the 1996 Act stated as one of its main objec-tives the need "to minimise the supervi-sory role of courts in the arbitral process" [Para 4(v) of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Arbitration and Con-ciliation Act, 1996]. This objective has found expression in Section 5 of the Act which prescribes the extent of judicial in-tervention in no uncertain terms:

Statute : 78. The judgment of this Court in the case of Neeraj Jhanji (supra) would not be applicable to the facts of the present case. In the said case, the petitioner had initially filed a writ petition before the Delhi High Court against the order-in-original passed by the Commissioner of Customs, Kanpur. Delhi High Court converted the writ petition into a statutory appeal under the Customs Act, 1962 by order dated 9-11-2009. On 9-9-2010 the Revenue raised an objection about the territorial jurisdiction of that Court. On 5-1-2012 the petitioner withdrew the appeal with liberty to approach the jurisdictional High Court and then filed a statutory appeal before the Allahabad High Court after a delay of 697 days. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations in Neeraj Jhanji (supra):

Legislation : "32. There is another reason why the benefit of Section 14 of the Limitation Act cannot be extended to the appellants. All of them are well conversant with various statutory provisions including FEMA. One of them was declared a notified person under Section 3(2) of the Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in Securities) Act, 1992 and several civil and criminal cases are pending against him. The very fact that they had engaged a group of eminent advocates to present their cause before the Delhi and the Bombay High Courts shows that they have the assistance of legal experts and this seems to be the reason why they invoked the jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court and not of the Bombay High Court despite the fact that they are residents of Bombay and have been contesting other matters including the proceedings pending before the Special Court at Bombay. It also appears that the appellants were sure that keeping in view their past conduct, the Bombay High Court may not interfere with the order of the Appellate Tribunal. Therefore, they took a chance before the Delhi High Court and succeeded in persuading the learned Single Judge of the Court to entertain their prayer for stay of further proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal. The promptness with which the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant, Kartik K. Parekh made a statement before the Delhi High Court on 7-11-2007 that the writ petition may be converted into an appeal and considered on merits is a clear indication of the appellant's unwillingness to avail remedy before the High Court i.e. the Bombay High Court which had the exclusive jurisdiction to entertain an appeal under Section 35 of the Act.

Legislation : "6.8. A term of a contract will not be final and binding if it is shown that the flat purchasers had no option but to sign on the dotted line, on a contract framed by the builder. The contractual terms of the agreement dated 8-5-2012 are ex facie one-sided, unfair and unreasonable. The incorporation of such one-sided clauses in an agreement constitutes an unfair trade practice as per Section 2(1)(r) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 since it adopts unfair methods or practices for the purpose of selling the flats by the builder."

Statute : 108. In the case of Krishna Bahadur vs. Purna Theatre and others (2004) 8 SCC 229, the appellant was appointed in the post of messenger-cum-bearer in the establishment of the respondent. A disciplinary proceeding was initiated against him wherein, he was found guilty and he was dismissed from service. The Industrial Tribunal set aside the dismissal with full back wages and compensation. The appellant was permitted to join his duties but back wages were not paid. He was again retrenched from services and a sum of Rs. 9,030/- was paid as retrenchment compensation, which the appellant was said to have received under protest. A trade union took the cause of the appellant, inter alia, on the ground of contravention of Section 25-G of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, so also on the ground of insufficiency of the amount of compensation paid to the appellant in terms of Section 25-F(b) thereof. An industrial dispute was raised before the Assistant Labour Commissioner, which failed, whereupon the Industrial Tribunal was approached by the appellant. In the meantime, the appellant had also initiated a proceeding under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 which ended in an amicable settlement, according to which, the appellant agreed to receive a sum of Rs. 39,000/- as full and final settlement.

Legislation : Explanation 2.-For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby declared that on and from the date of com-mencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2019, the provisions of this clause shall also apply to the corporate in-solvency resolution process of a cor-porate debtor-

Legislation : Explanation.-For the purposes of clause (e), if any approval of shareholders is re-quired under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any other law for the time being in force for the implementation of actions under the resolution plan, such approval shall be deemed to have been given and it shall not be a contravention of that Act or law.

Legislation : Provided that where the resolution plan contains a provision for combination, as re-ferred to in Section 5 of the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003), the resolution applicant shall obtain the approval of the Competition Commission of India under that Act prior to the approval of such resolution plan by the committee of creditors."

Legislation : "52. As aforesaid, upon receipt of a "re-jected" resolution plan the adjudicating au-thority (NCLT) is not expected to do anything more; but is obligated to initiate liquidation process under Section 33(1) of the I&B Code. The legislature has not endowed the adjudi-cating authority (NCLT) with the jurisdiction or authority to analyse or evaluate the com-mercial decision of CoC much less to enquire into the justness of the rejection of the reso-lution plan by the dissenting financial credi-tors. From the legislative history and the background in which the I&B Code has been enacted, it is noticed that a completely new approach has been adopted for speeding up the recovery of the debt due from the de-faulting companies. In the new approach, there is a calm period followed by a swift res-olution process to be completed within 270 days (outer limit) failing which, initiation of liquidation process has been made inevitable and mandatory. In the earlier regime, the corporate debtor could indefinitely continue to enjoy the protection given under Section 22 of the Sick Industrial Companies Act, 1985 or under other such enactments which has now been forsaken. Besides, the com-mercial wisdom of CoC has been given paramount status without any judicial intervention, for ensuring completion of the stated processes within the timelines prescribed by the I&B Code. There is an intrinsic assumption that financial cred-itors are fully informed about the viabil-ity of the corporate debtor and feasibility of the proposed resolution plan. They act on the basis of thorough examination of the proposed resolution plan and assess-ment made by their team of experts. The opinion on the subject-matter expressed by them after due deliberations in CoC meetings through voting, as per voting shares, is a collective business decision. The legislature, consciously, has not pro-vided any ground to challenge the "com-mercial wisdom" of the individual finan-cial creditors or their collective decision before the adjudicating authority. That is made non-justiciable."

