Statute : 2. Down to its bare bones, this appeal turns upon the interface of the Civil Services Examination Rules 2018 "CSE Rules 2018" dated 7 February 2018 with the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 "RPwD Act, 2016".

Statute : 9. During the course of the proceedings, by an order dated 16 January 2020, we directed the All India Institute of Medical Sciences "AIIMS" to constitute a medical board to evaluate the condition of the appellant and render its opinion on (i) whether he suffers from a benchmark disability within the meaning of Section 2(r) and Section 2(zc) of the RPwD Act, 2016; and (ii) whether he is a 'person with disability' under Section 2(s) of the RPwD Act, 2016 and the extent of the disability. AIIMS, by its report dated 10 February 2020, opined that the appellant suffers from a "chronic neurological condition" termed as bilateral Writer's Cramp. However, the report opines that while he does not suffer from a "benchmark disability", the appellant is a 'person with disability' under the RPwD Act, 2016. The extent of the disability is assessed at 6%.

Statute : i. The appellant has been issued medical certificates dated 21 March 2015 and 27 August 2018, which certify that he has a Writer's Cramp and would require a scribe. According to Section 2(s) of the RPwD Act, 2016, a person with disability means a person with long-term, physical, mental, intellectual and sensory impairment, which hinders their full and effective participation in society. These certificates prove that the appellant falls under Section 2(s) of the Act and is entitled to the protection of the Act;

Statute : iv. The CSE Rules 2018 and the CSE Notification 2018 violate Article 14 and Article 16(1) of the Constitution and the RPwD Act, 2016 as they provide for scribes only for candidates who are blind, those suffering from locomotor disability or cerebral palsy. In the CSE Rules 2018, applications are invited from all persons with disabilities and age relaxation is also provided to them, including for those suffering from learning disabilities. However, the provision of scribes is limited to a few candidates;

Statute : viii. The RPwD Act, 2016 makes a distinction between "persons with disability" and "persons with benchmark disability", the latter being those who are certified by a disability certificate to have not less than 40% of the specified disabilities enumerated under the Schedule to the Act. Persons with benchmark disability are eligible for special provisions of reservation in employment and higher education. However, Section 20 of the Act applies to all persons with disabilities and is not limited to persons with benchmark disability. Thus, even without the disability certificate, the appellant would be entitled to measures of reasonable accommodation such as the provision of a scribe for professional examinations; and

Statute : These rules have since been amended in 2019. Apart from the notification which has been issued by the UPSC, there are guidelines which have been prescribed by the MSJE in the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities. A notification has been issued on 4 January 2018 in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 56 of the RPwD Act, 2016. Section 56 is comprised in Chapter X of the RPwD Act, 2016 titled as "Certification of Specified Disabilities". Section 56 provides that:

Legislation : "Now, therefore, in exercise of powers conferred by Section 56 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016), the Central Government hereby notifies the guidelines for the purpose of assessing the extent of following specified disabilities in a person after having considered the recommendations of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as provided at Annexure II, namely:-

Legislation : Note :- In terms of Section 57 of the Rights of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016), the State Governments or as the case may be, Union Territory Administrators shall designate persons, having requisite qualifications and experience, as certifying authorities, who shall be competent to issue the certificate of disability and also notify the jurisdiction within which and the terms and conditions subject to which, the certifying authority shall perform its certification functions.

Statute : 19. On 29 August 2018, the MSJE in the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities issued an Office Memorandum. The OM is titled: "Guidelines for conducting written examination for persons with benchmark disabilities". The OM notes that the Department issued guidelines for conducting written examinations for persons with disabilities defined under the erstwhile legislation, namely the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act 1995 "1995 Act". These guidelines were issued on 26 February 2013.

Statute : 20. The guidelines were reviewed under the auspices of a committee which was constituted on the basis of the issues which were raised by the UPSC, among other bodies. In the meantime, the 1995 Act was superseded by the enactment of the RPwD Act, 2016 which came into force on 19 April 2017. The OM states that the RPwD Act, 2016 provides for reservations in government jobs for persons with benchmark disabilities as defined in Section 2(r). Based on the findings of the Committee, the Union government has through the OM laid down revised guidelines "for conducting a written examination for persons with benchmark disabilities" in supersession of the earlier guidelines dated 26 February 2013. The above guidelines which have been notified through the OM dated 29 August 2018 inter alia contain the following stipulations in regard to the provision of scribes to persons with benchmark disabilities:

Legislation : IV. The facility of Scribe/Reader/Lab Assistant should be allowed to any person with benchmark disability as defined under section 2(r) of the RPwD Act, 2016 and has limitation in writing including that of speed if so desired by him/her.

Legislation : "Candidates must write the papers in their own hand. In no circumstances will they be allowed the help of a scribe to write the answers for them. The Persons with Benchmark Disabilities in the categories of blindness, locomotor disability (both arm affected - BA) and cerebral palsy will be provided the facility of scribe, if desired by the person. In case of other category of Persons with Benchmark Disabilities as defined under section 2(r) of the RPWD Act, 2016, the facility of scribe will be allowed to such candidates on production of a certificate to the effect that the person concerned has physical limitation to write, and scribe is essential to write examination on behalf from the Chief Medical Officer/Civil Surgeon/Medical Superintendent of a Government Health Care institution as per proforma at Appendix - V. The Persons with Benchmark Disabilities in the category of blindness, locomotor disability (both arm affected - BA) and cerebral palsy will be allowed Compensatory Time of twenty minutes per hour of the examination In case of other categories of Persons with Benchmar k1 disabilities, this facility will be provided on production of a certificate to the effect that the person concerned has physical limitation to write from the Chief Medical Officer/Civil Surgeon/Medical Superintendent of a Government Health Care institution as per proforma at Appendix-V."

Statute : 21. UPSC in its counter affidavit filed through its Joint Secretary states that it conducts the CSE "strictly in accordance with the rules framed and enacted by the Government of India in the Department of Personnel and Training". It also notices that the provisions of the RPwD Act 2016 are administered by a nodal ministry known as the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment which finalises policies, instructions and guidelines with aid and assistance of experts in the field, for the purpose of extending benefits under the enactment. According to UPSC:

Statute : Contrasted with the position which has been adopted on affidavit before this Court by the UPSC, a more nuanced view has been suggested by the reply filed on behalf of the MSJE. The Ministry, while reiterating the guidelines which have been framed on 29 August 2018 states that writer's cramp is not specifically included in the list of specified disabilities contained in the schedule to the RPwD Act, 2016 and "accordingly the guidelines stated above are not applicable to a person suffering from writer's cramp". Having said this, the Ministry states:

Statute : 25. It is in this backdrop that the Court must resolve the issue, bearing as it does on the rights of similarly situated candidates. The RPwD Act, 2016 embodies two distinct concepts when it speaks of (i) 'persons with benchmark disabilities' and (ii) persons with disability. In defining a person with benchmark disability, Section 2(r) encompasses two categories: (i) a person with not less than 40 per cent of a specified disability, where the specified disability has not been defined in measurable terms and (ii) a person with disability where the specified disability has been defined in measurable terms, as certified by the certifying authority. In other words, Section 2(r) encompasses both a situation where a specified disability has not been defined in measurable terms, in which event it means a person with not less than 40 per cent of the specified disability but also where a specified disability has been defined in measurable terms. A certification by the certifying authority is contemplated in regard to whether the person concerned does in fact meet the specified norm as quantified.

Statute : 30. The concept of benchmark disabilities under the RPwD Act, 2016 has specifically been adopted in relation with the provisions of Chapter VI and Chapter VII. Chapter VI contains special provisions for persons with benchmark disabilities. Among those provisions is Section 31 (free education for children with benchmark disability), Section 32 (reservation in higher educational institutions), Section 33 (identification of posts for reservation), Section 34 (reservation), Section 36 (Special Employment Exchange) and Section 37 (Special Schemes and Development Programmes). Chapter VII contains special provisions for persons with benchmark disabilities in need of high support. Thus, the concept of benchmark disabilities has been adopted by the legislation bearing in mind specific provisions which are contained in the law for persons meeting this description.

Statute : 32. Part III of our Constitution does not explicitly include persons with disabilities within its protective fold. However, much like their able-bodied counterparts, the golden triangle of Articles 14, 19 and 21 applies with full force and vigour to the disabled. The RPwD Act 2016 seeks to operationalize and give concrete shape to the promise of full and equal citizenship held out by the Constitution to the disabled and to execute its ethos of inclusion and acceptance.

Statute : 33. The fundamental postulate upon which the RPwD Act 2016 is based is the principle of equality and non-discrimination. Section 3 casts an affirmative obligation on the government to ensure that persons with disabilities enjoy (i) the right to equality; (ii) a life with dignity; and (iii) respect for their integrity equally with others. Section 3 is an affirmative declaration of the intent of the legislature that the fundamental postulate of equality and non-discrimination is made available to persons with disabilities without constraining it with the notion of a benchmark disability. Section 3 is a statutory recognition of the constitutional rights embodied in Articles 14, 19 and 21 among other provisions of Part III of the Constitution. By recognizing a statutory right and entitlement on the part of persons who are disabled, Section 3 seeks to implement and facilitate the fulfillment of the constitutional rights of persons with disabilities.

Statute : G.2 Scheme of the 2016 Act

Statute : 36. The RPwD Act 2016 was a landmark legislation which repealed the 1995 Act and brought Indian legislation on disability in line with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities "UNCRPD". Under the old regime, disability was simply characterized as a medical condition devoid of any understanding of how disability is produced by social structures that cater to able-bodied persons and hamper and deny equal participation of persons with disabilities in the society. Section 2 (t) of the 1995 Act defined a "person with disability" in the following terms:

Statute : The RPwD Act 2016 has a more inclusive definition of "persons with disability" evidencing a shift from a stigmatizing medical model of disability under the 1995 Act to a social model of disability which recognizes that it is the societal and physical constraint that are at the heart of exclusion of persons with disabilities from full and effective participation in society. Section 2(s) of the RPwD Act 2016 [which we have analyzed in paras 26-28 above] provides:

Statute : A barrier is defined under Section 2(c) of the RPwD Act 2016 in the following terms:

Statute : Under the 1995 Act, only seven kinds of disabilities were recognized. Section 2(i) listed the following disabilities:

Statute : The RPwD Act, 2016 now recognizes 21 "specified disabilities" and enables the Central Government to add further categories of disability. The 2016 Act also makes special provisions for persons with benchmark disability under Chapter VI and VII of the Act. A person with benchmark disability is defined under Section 2(r) of the 2016 Act [analyzed in para 25 above] as:

Statute : It is clear from the scheme of the RPwD Act, 2016 that "person with disability" and "person with benchmark disability" are treated as separate categories of individuals having different rights and protections. A third category of individuals "persons with disability having high support needs" has also been defined under the RPwD Act 2016.

Statute : 37. The general principle of reasonable accommodation did not find a place in the 1995 Act. The provision for taking aid of a scribe was limited to blind students or students with low vision in educational institutions. Section 31 of the 1995 Act provided:

Statute : The principle of reasonable accommodation has found a more expansive manifestation in the RPwD Act 2016. Section 3 of the RPwD Act 2016 goes beyond a formal guarantee of non-discrimination by casting affirmative duties and obligations on government to protect the rights recognized in Section 3 by taking steps to utilize the capacity of persons with disabilities "by providing appropriate environment". Among the obligations which are cast on the government is the duty to take necessary steps to ensure reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities. The concept of reasonable accommodation in Section 2(y) incorporates making "necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments" so long as they do not impose a disproportionate or undue burden in a particular case to ensure to persons with disability the enjoyment or exercise of rights equally with others." Equality, non-discrimination and dignity are the essence of the protective ambit of the RPwD Act 2016.

Statute : 38. While most of the obligations under the RPwD Act 2016 are cast upon the government or local authorities, the Act and rules made under it have also imposed certain obligations on the private sector. The role of the private sector in the market has increased manifold since the advent of liberalisation in India. The RPwD Act 2016 recognizes that with the burgeoning role of the private sector in generating employment in India, an active responsibility has to be cast upon private employers to create an inclusive workforce by providing persons with disabilities equal opportunities in the job market. However, the guarantee of equal opportunity must be accompanied by the provision of reasonable accommodation. The Rules framed under the RPwD Act 2016 stipulate that private establishments shall not discriminate against persons with disability on the ground of disability. Rule 3 (1) of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2017 It is to be noted that the definition of discrimination under Section 2(h) of the RPwD Act, 2016 includes denial of reasonable accommodation. Private employers are mandated to frame an equal opportunity policy Section 21 of the RPwD Act, 2016 read with Rule 8 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2017. Equal opportunity policies for establishments having more than 20 employees are required to include provisions relating to (i) appointment of liaison officers in establishments to look after the recruitment of persons with disabilities and provisions of facilities and amenities for such employees Rule 8(3) (e) of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2017; (ii) identification of posts/vacancies for disabled persons Rule 8(3) (b) of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2017; (iii) provision of additional facilities and benefits such as training facilities, assistive devices, barrier free accessibility, preference in transfer and promotion, allotment of residential accommodation and special leave Rule 8 (3) sub-clauses (c) and (d) of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2017. The RPwD Act 2016 further provides that private establishments have to conform with accessibility norms stipulated by the government with respect to building plans Section 44 of the RPwD Act, 2016. The RPwD Act 2016 also provides that 5 % of the workforce of establishments receiving incentives from the appropriate government would be comprised of persons having benchmark disability Section 35 of RPwD Act, 2016. This Court in Union of India v. National Federation of the Blind (2013) 10 SCC 772 has recognized that employment opportunities play an instrumental role in empowering persons with disabilities. Justice P. Sathasivam (as he then was) observed:

Statute : 39. The RPwD Act 2016 is fundamentally premised on the recognition that there are many ways to be, none more 'normal' or 'better' than the other. It seeks to provide the disabled a sense of comfort and empowerment in their difference. Recognizing the state of affairs created by centuries of sequestering and discrimination that this discrete and insular minority has faced for no fault on its part, the RPwD Act 2016 aims to provide them an even platform to thrive, to flourish and offer their unique contribution to the world. It is based on the simple idea with profound implications that each of us has: "unique powers to share with the world and make it interesting and richer." Sonia Sotomayor,, Just Ask!: Be Different, be Brave, be You [2019, Penguin] letter to the reader. By opening doors for them and attenuating the barriers thwarting the realization of their full potential, it seeks to ensure that they are no longer treated as second class citizens.

Statute : 40. It gives a powerful voice to the disabled people who, by dint of the way their impairment interacts with society, hitherto felt muted and silenced. The Act tells them that they belong, that they matter, that they are assets, not liabilities and that they make us stronger, not weaker. The other provisions of Chapter II follow upon the basic postulates embodied in Section 3 by applying them in specific contexts to ensure rights in various milieus such as community life, reproduction, access to justice and guardianship. Chapter III of the RPwD Act, 2016 recognises specific duties on the part of educational institutions. Section 17 speaks of specific measures to promote and facilitate inclusive education. Among them, Clause (g) contemplates the provision of books, learning materials and assistive devices for students with benchmark disabilities free of cost up to the age of eighteen. Section 17(i) requires suitable modifications in the curriculum and examination system to meet the needs of students with disabilities such as (i) extra time for completion of examination (ii) the facility of scribe or amanuensis (iii) exemption from second and third language courses. The guarantee under Section 17 (i) is not confined to persons with benchmark disabilities but extends to students with disabilities. It is thus evident that the legislature has made a clear distinction between disability and benchmark disability. Section 20 provides a mandate of non-discrimination in employment. Under Section 21, every establishment is under a mandate to notify equal opportunity policies setting out the measures which will be adopted in pursuance of the provisions of Chapter IV. Chapter V provides guarantees for social security, health, rehabilitation and recreation to persons with disabilities.

Statute : 41. When the government in recognition of its affirmative duties and obligations under the RPwD Act 2016 makes provisions for facilitating a scribe during the course of the Civil Services Examination, it cannot be construed to confer a largesse. Nor does it by allowing a scribe confer a privilege on a candidate. The provision for the facility of a scribe is in pursuance of the statutory mandate to ensure that persons with disabilities are able to live a life of equality and dignity based on respect in society for their bodily and mental integrity. There is a fundamental fallacy on the part of the UPSE/DoPT in proceeding on the basis that the facility of a scribe shall be made available only to persons with benchmark disabilities. This is occasioned by the failure of the MSJE to clarify their guidelines. The whole concept of a benchmark disability within the meaning of Section 2(r) is primarily in the context of special provisions including reservation that are embodied in Chapter VI of the RPwD Act 2016. Conceivably, the Parliament while mandating the reservation of posts in government establishments and of seats in institutions of higher learning was of the view that this entitlement should be recognized for persons with benchmark disabilities. As a matter of legislative policy, these provisions in Chapter VI have been made disability is stipulated. Except in the specific statutory context where the norm of benchmark disability has been applied, it would be plainly contrary to both the text and intent of the enactment to deny the rights and entitlements which are recognized as inhering in persons with disabilities on the ground that they do not meet the threshold for a benchmark disability. A statutory concept which has been applied by Parliament in specific situations cannot be extended to others where the broader expression, persons with disability, is used statutorily. The guidelines which have been framed on 29 August 2018 can by no means be regarded as being exhaustive of the situations in which a scribe can be availed of by persons other than those who suffer from benchmark disabilities. The MSJE does not in its counter affidavit before this Court treat those guidelines as exhaustive of the circumstances in which a scribe can be provided for persons other than those having benchmark disabilities. This understanding of the MSJE is correct for the simple reason that the rights which emanate from provisions such as Section 3 extend to persons with disability as broadly defined by Section 2(s).

Statute : 43. At the heart of this case lies the principle of reasonable accommodation. Individual dignity undergirds the RPwD Act, 2016. Intrinsic to its realization is recognizing the worth of every person as an equal member of society. Respect for the dignity of others and fostering conditions in which every individual can evolve according to their capacities are key elements of a legal order which protects, respects and facilitates individual autonomy. In seeking to project these values as inalienable rights of the disabled, the RPwD Act, 2016 travels beyond being merely a charter of non-discrimination. It travels beyond imposing restraints on discrimination against the disabled. The law does this by imposing a positive obligation on the State to secure the realization of rights. It does so by mandating that the State must create conditions in which the barriers posed by disability can be overcome. The creation of an appropriate environment in which the disabled can pursue the full range of entitlements which are encompassed within human liberty is enforceable at law. In its emphasis on substantive equality, the enactment of the legislation is a watershed event in providing a legal foundation for equality of opportunity to the disabled.

Statute : 44. As a social construct, disability encompasses features broader and more comprehensive than a medical condition. The RPwD Act, 2016 recognizes that disability results in inequality of access to a range of public and private entitlements. The handicaps which the disabled encounter emerge out of disability's engagement with the barriers created by prejudice, discrimination and societal indifference. Operating as restraining factors, these barriers have origins which can be traced to physical, social, economic and psychological conditions in society. Operating on the pre-existing restraints posed by disability, these barriers to development produce outcomes in which the disabled bear an unequal share of societal burdens. The legislation has recognized that remedies for the barriers encountered by the disabled are to be found in the social environment in which they live, work and co-habit with others. The barriers encountered by every disabled person can be remedied by recognizing comprehensive rights as inhering in them; rights which impose duties and obligations on others.

Statute : 53. This judgment was delivered by this Court after India became a party to the UNCRPD and the RPwD Act 2016, came into force. The aforesaid view espoused by this Court is innocent of the principle of reasonable accommodation. This Court did not consider whether the failure of the TNPC to provide reasonable accommodation to a judge with a disability above the impugned ceiling was statutorily or constitutionally tenable. There is no reference in this Court's judgment to whether the appellant would have been able to discharge the duties of a Civil Judge (Junior Division), after being provided the reasonable accommodations necessitated by his disability.

Statute : 56. In light of the fact that the view of this court in Mohan was rendered in a case under the 1995 Act which has now been replaced by the RPwD Act 2016 and in light of the absence of a reasonable accommodation analysis by this Court, the Mohan judgment stands on a legally vulnerable footing. It would not be a binding precedent, after enforcement of the RPwD Act 2016.

Statute : 71. As one commentator notes, "if the connection between reservation in government jobs for the disabled and guidelines for grant of scribes in all exams they may appear in appears strange, that is because it is." Ibid. Another notes that there exists no justification for this move. Dr. Sanjay Jain, "Right to education : An enabler" in "Marginalised communities and higher education" in Eds Surendrakumar and H. L. Vinod "Marginalised communities and higher education", Sage Publication 2021 Critical Analysis of Scribe guidelines [forthcoming]. The facts of this case are a stark reminder of the need to generate greater legal consciousness about the entitlements of the disabled set forth in the RPwD Act 2016. We would also like to take judicial notice of the fact that several instances have come to light of competent authorities fixing criteria for the grant of scribes that are in brazen disregard of the RPwD Act 2016 and the OM dated 29 August 2018. Live Law News Network, 'BCI Creating Entry Barriers For Disabled Lawyers': Says Blind AIBE Candidate; Seeks Proper Implementation Of 2018 PwD Guidelines, 7th January, 2021, available at https://www.livelaw.in/top-stories/bar-council-of-india-aibe-persons-with-disability-blind-law-student-168124; Rintu Mariam Biju, AIBE 2021: Is BCI creating entry barriers for disabled law grads? 23rd January, 2021, Bar and Bench, available at https://www.barandbench.com/news/aibe-2021-is-bci-creating-entry-barriers-for-disabled-law-grads.

Statute : 72. If the legal entitlements set forth in the RPwD Act 2016 are to not remain mere parchment, reflected in our inability to overcome barriers against substantively unequal treatment, the nodal Ministry, in coordination with other relevant actors, must make a concerted effort to ensure that the fruits of the Act actually reach the intended beneficiaries. In this regard, Article 8(2) of the UNCRPD outlines the awareness-raising measures that must be undertaken. Based on Article 8, the RPwD Act 2016 captures the need for the State to conduct and promote awareness campaigns and sensitization programmes in Section 39. These must be conducted to recognize and advance knowledge of the skills and abilities of persons with disabilities and of their contributions to the workforce and foster respect for the decisions of persons with disabilities in their family life. Sensitization programmes must be held at educational institutions and in professional spheres on the condition of disability and the rights of disabled persons and the like. The government must give effect to these provisions regularly to sensitize our society to the everyday challenges that may be imposed by the actions or inactions of the able-bodied on their disabled counterparts.

