Statute : 3. On 04.02.2021, the State of Goa published an amendment to Section 10(1) of the Goa Municipalities Act, 1968 ["Goa Municipalities Act"] in the official gazette, by which the time frame for issuance of a notification for reservation of wards was stated as being "at least seven days" before the notification for schedule of dates and events of the elections. On the same day, the Director of Municipal Administration issued an order for reservation of wards for 11 municipal councils within the State of Goa. We are informed by the SEC that on 05.02.2021, electoral rolls were prepared and returning officers appointed for an ensuing election.

Legislation : (c) By a Writ of Mandamus, we direct the Director and ex-officio Additional Secretary, Municipal Administrator/Urban Development, Goa to issue fresh Notification under sub-section 1 of Section 9 r/w. Subsection 1 of Section 10 of the Goa Municipalities Act, 1968 within a period of 10 days from today, thereby ensuring inter alia, reservation for women of not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved for direct elections to the Municipal Councils.

Legislation : The Hon'ble Apex Court has reiterated the view taken by Full Bench of this Court and in the case of Ganesh Sukdev Gurule v/s. Tahsildar Sinnar & Ors (2019) 3 SCC 211. The issue for deliberation before the Apex Court involved Section 35 of the Maharashtra Village Panchayats Act, 1959, which is a provision for no confidence motion and sub-section 3 of the said Section indicating the requirement of majority of not less than two third of total number of members who are for the time being entitled to sit and vote. Construing the phrase "not less than", Their Lordships of the Apex Court, dealing with the arguments that when the fraction arrived is 5.33, it should be rounded to 5 has held as under:

Legislation : 26. We would have appreciated the submission advanced by the learned Advocate General that mere absence of policy would not lead to arbitrariness, albeit, we have before us instances as reflected in the Noting from where we have discerned that absence of policy has resulted into non discernable and non justifiable rotation of seats in different wards of respective Municipal Councils. The prescribed reservation of women as per the mandate is one such instance. Similar is the case in respect of the OBC reservations, though none of the petitioners before us raised the said ground before us, however, since we have perused the Noting, we are enlisting it as one of the aspect demonstrating non application of mind and attitude towards flouting the mandate of the State legislation. The Goa Municipalities Act, prescribes reservation for other backward classes based on concentration of the population of the said class in a particular ward. By the (amendment) Act, 2016 clause (bb) of sub section 2 of Section 9 has prescribed 27% number of seats to be filled in the election of Municipal Council to the person belonging to other back ward classes and such seats are to be allotted by reservations to different wards in the Council. The Noting produced before us reflect that there was utter failure to adhere to the said the proportion and other Municipal Councils where 27% of seats are reserved for other backward classes, the proportion of reservation in other Municipal Council stood to the percentage of 20% being in Valpoi, Pernem and Sanguem. In the remaining Municipal Councils, the percentage of reserved seats for OBC vary from 21% to 25%.

Statute : 23. Part IXA of the Constitution titled "The Municipalities" was inserted by the Constitution (Seventy-Fourth) Amendment Act, 1992 with effect from 1st June, 1993. Article 243P defines "Municipal Area" and "Municipality" as follows:

Legislation : I think that a brief examination of the scheme of Part XV of the Constitution and the Representation of the People Act, 1951, will show that the construction I have suggested is the correct one. Broadly speaking, before an election machinery can be brought into operation, there are three requisites which require to be attended to, namely, (1) there should be a set of laws and rules making provisions with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections, and it should be decided as to how these laws and rules are to be made; (2) there should be an executive charged with the duty of securing the due conduct of elections; and (3) there should be a judicial tribunal to deal with disputes arising out of or in connection with elections. Articles 327 and 328 deal with the first of these requisites, Article 324 with the second and Article 329 with the third requisite. The other two articles in Part XV, viz, Articles 325 and 326 deal with two matters of principle to which the Constitution-framers have attached much importance. They are: (1) prohibition against discrimination in the preparation of, or eligibility for inclusion in, the electoral rolls, on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them; and (2) adult suffrage. Part XV of the Constitution is really a code in itself providing the entire ground-work for enacting appropriate laws and setting up suitable machinery for the conduct of elections."

Legislation : "As already indicated, Article 71(1) confers jurisdiction and power on this court to inquire into and decide "all doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a President or Vice-President". The question is: Is there in this Article or in any other part of the Constitution or anywhere else any indication as to the time when such inquiry is to be held? In the first place, Article 71 postulates an "election of the President or Vice-President" and provides for inquiry into doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with such an election. What is the meaning to be given to the word "election" as used in this Article? If we give to the word "election" occurring in Article 71(1) the same wide meaning as comprising the entire election process culminating in a candidate being declared elected, then clearly the inquiry is to be made after such completed election i.e. after a candidate is declared to be elected as President or Vice-President as the case may be. We see no reason why this accepted meaning should not be given to the critical word. In the second place, under clause 3 of Article 71, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law regulate any matter "relating to or connected with the election" of a President or Vice-President. The words here also are similar to those used in Article 327 and are equally wide enough to cover matters relating to or connected with any stage of the entire election process. In exercise of powers conferred on it by Article 71(3), Parliament has enacted the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Election Act, 1952 (31 of 1952) to regulate certain matters relating to or connected with elections to the office of President and Vice-President of India. A glance through the provisions of this Act will indicate that in the view of Parliament the time for the exercise of jurisdiction by this court to inquire into and decide doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the Presidential election is after the entire election process is completed."

Legislation : "38. Article 324, which we have set out earlier, is a plenary provision vesting the whole responsibility for national and State elections and, therefore, the necessary powers to discharge that function. It is true that Article 324 has to be read in the light of the constitutional scheme and the 1950 Act and the 1951 Act. Sri Rao is right to the extent he insists that if competent legislation is enacted as visualised in Article 327 the Commission cannot shake itself free from the enacted prescriptions. After all, as Mathew, J. has observed in Indira Gandhi:

Legislation : 43. Section 10-A of the 1959 Act and Section 9-A of the 1961 Act read with Articles 243-K and 243-O, are pari materia with Article 324 of the Constitution of India. In view of the judgments referred, we find that the remedy of an aggrieved person accepting or rejecting nomination of a candidate is by way of an election petition in view of the bar created under Section 15-A of the 1959 Act. The said Act is a complete code providing machinery for redressal to the grievances pertaining to election as contained in Section 15 of the 1959 Act. The High Court though exercises extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India but such jurisdiction is discretionary in nature and may not be exercised in view of the fact that an efficacious alternative remedy is available and more so exercise restraint in terms of Article 243-O of the Constitution of India. Once alternate machinery is provided by the statute, the recourse to writ jurisdiction is not an appropriate remedy. It is a prudent discretion to be exercised by the High Court not to interfere in the election matters, especially after declaration of the results of the elections but relegate the parties to the remedy contemplated by the statute. In view of the above, the writ petition should not have been entertained by the High Court. However, the order of the High Court that the appellant has not furnished the election expenses incurred on the date of election does not warrant any interference."

Statute : 55. In Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission (supra), this court dealt with Sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962, and the bar contained in Article 329(a) as follows:

Legislation : 36. In Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission [(1967) 1 SCR 400] a Constitution Bench of this court while interpreting Sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 which are in pari materia with the provisions of the present Act, observed:

Statute : 57. In Rampakavi Rayappa Belagali v. B.D. Jatti, (1970) 3 SCC 147, the Court dealt with the scheme of the Representation of People Act, 1950 and its inter-relation with Article 329(a) as follows:

Legislation : 45. What is more objectionable in the approach of the High court is that although clause (a) of Article 243-O of the Constitution enacts a bar on the interference by the courts in electoral matters including the questioning of the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of the constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies made or purported to be made under Article 243-K and the election to any panchayat, the High Court has gone into the question of the validity of the delimitation of the constituencies and also the allotment of seats to them. We may, in this connection, refer to a decision of this court in Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission [(1967) 1 SCR 400]. In that case, a notification of the Delimitation Commission whereby a city which had been a general constituency was notified as reserved for the Scheduled Castes. This was challenged on the ground that the petitioner had a right to be a candidate for Parliament from the said constituency which had been taken away. This court held that the impugned notification was a law relating to the delimitation of the constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies made under Article 327 of the Constitution, and that an examination of Sections 8 and 9 of the Delimitation Commission Act showed that the matters therein dealt with were not subject to the scrutiny of any court of law. There was a very good reason for such a provision because if the orders made under Sections 8 and 9 were not to be treated as final, the result would be that any voter, if he so wished, could hold up an election indefinitely by questioning the delimitation of the constituencies from court to court. Although an order under Section 8 or Section 9 of the Delimitation Commission Act and published under Section 10(1) of that Act is not part of an Act of Parliament, its effect is the same. Section 10(4) of that Act puts such an order in the same position as a law made by Parliament itself which could only be made by it under Article 327. If we read Articles 243-C, 243-K and 243-O in place of Article 327 and Sections 2(kk), 11-F and 12-BB of the Act in place of Sections 8 and 9 of the Delimitation Act, 1950, it will be obvious that neither the delimitation of the panchayat area nor of the constituencies in the said areas and the allotments of seats to the constituencies could have been challenged nor the court could have entertained such challenge except on the ground that before the delimitation, no objections were invited and no hearing was given. Even this challenge could not have been entertained after the notification for holding the elections was issued. The High Court not only entertained the challenge but has also gone into the merits of the alleged grievances although the challenge was made after the notification for the election was issued on 31-8-1994."

Legislation : 25. In this connection, it may be necessary to mention that there is one feature to be found in the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 which is absent in the U.P. Act. Section 10 of the Act of 1962 provided that the Commission shall cause each of its order made under Sections 8 and 9 to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes of the States concerned. Upon publication in the Gazette of India every such order shall have the force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. Because of these specific provisions of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962, in the case of Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission [AIR 1967 SC 669], this court held that notification of orders passed under Sections 8 and 9 of that Act had the force of law and therefore, could not be assailed in any court of law because of the bar imposed by Article 329. The U.P. Act of 1959, however, merely provides that the draft order of delimitation of municipal areas shall be published in the Official Gazette for objections for a period of not less than seven days. The draft order may be altered or modified after hearing the objections filed, if any. Thereupon, it shall become final. It does not lay down that such an order upon reaching finality will have the force of law and shall not be questioned in any court of law. For this reason, it may not be possible to say that such an order made under Section 32 of the U.P. Act has the force of law and is beyond challenge by virtue of Article 243-ZG. But any such challenge should be made soon after the final order is published..."

Statute : 64. Applying the law to the facts of the present case, the first important thing to be noted is that the constitutional bar contained in Article 243ZG(a) does not apply to the facts of this case. As has correctly been pointed out by Shri Laud, the judgment in Anugrah Narain Singh v. State of U.P. (supra) would apply as the Goa Municipalities Act does not contain any provision akin to Section 10(2) or 10(4) of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 that was highlighted in Meghraj's case (supra), providing that orders of the Delimitation Commission have the force of law. This being the case, the first and foremost roadblock that has been put forward by the learned Solicitor General has been cleared. No fault can be found with the Division Bench of the High Court in ignoring any constitutional bar in arriving at the conclusion that the 04.02.2021 order is illegal and ultra vires the provisions of Article 243T of the Constitution of India read with Sections 9 and 10 of the Goa Municipalities Act. On merits, it is important to note that Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General, did not advance any argument that the reservation of seats for women and OBCs was in accord with the provisions of the Constitution and the Goa Municipalities Act. Indeed, even otherwise, we do not find fault with the Division Bench judgment in its conclusion that a fraction has to be worked upwards whatever that fraction be, given the mandatory language of Article 243T of the Constitution which provides for reservation for women which shall not be less than one-third. Also, the findings of the High Court on OBC reservation not complying with the mandate of Section 9(2)(bb) in that in several councils it was below 27% cannot be faulted. The same goes for observations made on the 1 ST seat in Sanguem and non-application of the principle of rotation.

