Statute : 1. The civil appeals in the present case arise under Section 22 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 ("NGT Act"). The correctness of a judgment and order dated 4 May 2016 of the National Green Tribunal ("NGT") is in issue.

Statute : 2. The NGT dealt with an original application filed by the second respondent, who is also the appellant in companion Civil Appeal Nos. 5229-5230 of 2016, to challenge a report dated 18 September 2008 of the Central Empowered Committee ("CEC"), the first respondent. In its report, the CEC concluded, inter alia, that a part of the Bus Stand Complex constructed by the second respondent and the appellant at McLeod Ganj in Himachal Pradesh violates the provisions of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 ("Forest Act"). The CEC recommended the demolition of the illegal portions.

Legislation : 2. Whether the Tribunal failed to consider properly the effect of Section 14 of the Himachal Pradesh Bus Stand Management and Development Authority Act, 1999 which empowers the authority to establish and maintain hotels and restaurants at or near bus stands?

Legislation : 3. Whether the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction in holding that alleged violations of the Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Planning Act, 1977 are made out even though the said enactment is absent in the Schedule I of enactments attached to the National Green Tribunal Act?"

Legislation : "After careful consideration of the proposal of the State Government, the competent authority hereby conveys approval under Section-2 of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, for diversion of 0.093 hectares of forest land for the construction of parking place at McLeod Ganj, forest division Dharamsala, District Kangra, HP, subject to following conditions:

Statute : 9. In April 2000, the appellant was constituted for the construction of bus stands in the State of Himachal Pradesh following the enactment of the Himachal Pradesh Bus Stands Management and Development Authority Act, 1999 ("HP Bust Stands Act"). In January/February of 2006, the land diverted for non - forest use under the above orders dated 12 November 1997 and 1 March 2001 was transferred on a 99 year lease to the appellant.

Legislation : "Please refer to your letter No. FFE-B-F(2)-87/97 dated 8th May, 2007 on the above mentioned subject seeking approval of Government of India for changing of land use from construction of parking on 0.093 hectare of forest land and Bus Stand Complex and Hotel on entire 0.573 hectare of forest land for non-forestry propose under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and change in the name of user agency from SDO(Civil) and HP Tourism Department to HP Bus Stand Management and Development Authority.

Legislation : (d) the State Government may also be directed to simultaneously identify and initiate stringent and deterrent action in a time bound manner against all the concerned persons and officials for complete abdication of their responsibility and accountability in the matter of governance and who are responsible for blatantly allowing the unauthorized and illegal building structures to come up on the two pieces of forest land in flagrant violation of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the HP Town and Country Planning Act, 1977 and other relevant local laws; and

Statute : (iv) In relation to the violations of the Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Planning Act, 1977 ("TCP Act"):

Statute : (vi) The second respondent is no longer managing or operating the parking space and the bus stand after the District Magistrate, Kangra by an order dated 7 June 2019 under Section 144 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, constituted and authorized an Executive Committee to take control of the parking space and run it free of cost in public interest. Further, the District Magistrate, through an order dated 31 July 2019, notified the space available at McLeod Ganj Bus Stand as public parking place under Section 117 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, in the interest of the efficient organization of the transport system;

Legislation : "4. The EPC has prepared the conceptual plan Ex. Cl I4A, but the bus stand authority went on to flout the aforesaid conceptual plan and on its own and decided to construct bus stand-cum-parking and hotel complex on two pieces of forest land under BOT basis. No sanction or approval was obtained by the Bus Stand Authority under the provision of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for diversion of forest land to use the same for non - forest purpose. The Government of India Ministry of Environment and Forest, turned down the request to use the forest land for non-forest purpose and change the name of user agency from SDO(C) and H.P. Tourism Department to Bus Stand Authority vide copy of letter Ex. Cl03.

Statute : 61. In M.C. Mehta vs Union of India (2018) 18 SCC 397., a two judge Bench of this Court held that the land notified under Punjab Land Preservation Act, 1900 in the Kant Enclave was to be treated as "forest land". As a result, any construction made on the land or its utilization for "non-forest purposes" without Central Government approval was violative of the Forest Act and therefore illegal. The relevant excerpt of this Court's decision, speaking through Justice Madan B. Lokur, is as follows:

Legislation : "41. The Tribunal constituted under the NGT Act has jurisdiction under Section 14 of the said Act to decide all civil cases where any substantial question relating to environment including enforcement of any right relating to environment is involved and such question arises out of the implementation of the enactments specified in Schedule I to the said Act, which includes the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

