Statute : 1. These appeals by special leave are directed against the common judgment and order dated 18.12.2014 in Writ Petition Nos. 2552 of 2013 and 6258 of 2013 whereby, the High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad for the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh Hereinafter referred to as 'the High Court' upheld the assessment orders dated 20.01.2010 and 18.05.2010 passed by the Commercial Tax Officer, Chinawaltair Circle Hereinafter referred to as 'the CTO'. and held that the transactions in question were not the sales in the course of import but had been inter-State sales, liable to Central Service Tax; and denied the exemption claimed under Section 5(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 Hereinafter referred to as 'the CST Act'. while granting time to the appellant to produce the prescribed C-Forms to the assessing authority for availing the benefit of concessional rate of tax.

Statute : 2.1. However, in each of these transactions, when the goods in question reached the port at Visakhapatnam (also known as Vizag), the appellant carried out the proceedings envisaged by the Customs Act, 1962 Hereinafter referred to as 'the Customs Act'. and filed a bill of entry for warehousing and thereafter, filed another bill of entry for home consumption (ex-bond). Accordingly and on the basis of such bills of entry, the appellant was duly assessed for customs duty. The appellant later on raised debit notes on the end-buyers.

Statute : 14.1. As regards the question of the authority of CTO to pass the assessment order in question, the High Court extensively examined the scope of the provisions contained in A.P. Value Added Tax Act, 2005, A.P. Value Added Tax Rules, 2005 and Section 9(2) of the CST Act and ultimately rejected the contentions urged on behalf of the appellant that the CTO was lacking authority to assess the appellant to tax under the CST Act.

Statute : 16.3. Learned counsel for the appellant has contended that to qualify under Section 5(2) of the CST Act, the essential ingredients of high sea sales would be of the transfer of document of title and transfer of goods to be made while the goods are on high seas. With reference to the definition of term "crossing the customs frontiers of India", as occurring in Section 2(ab) of the CST Act, learned counsel has pointed out that this term means crossing the limits of the area of customs station in which imported goods or exported goods are ordinarily kept before clearance by customs authorities. Then, with reference to Section 2(4) of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 Hereinafter referred to as 'the Sale of Goods Act'. and the decisions of this Court in J.V. Gokal & Co. (Private) Ltd. v. Assistant Collector of Sales-Tax (Inspection) and Ors: (1960) 2 SCR 852 and Minerals & Metals Trading Corporation of India Ltd. v. Sales Tax Officer and Ors: (1998) 7 SCC 19 Hereinafter this case of Minerals & Metals has also been referred to as 'Orissa case', in order to maintain the distinction with the other decision of Andhra Pradesh High Court carrying the same first name, which was referred to by the High Court in the impugned judgment., learned counsel has submitted that the transfer of bill of lading signifies transfer of title in the goods. As regards transfer before the goods crossing customs frontiers of India, the learned counsel has referred to the decision of this Court in Hotel Ashoka (supra) to submit that when the goods are kept in the bonded warehouse, they cannot be said to have crossed the customs frontiers of India.

Statute : 20.2. In exercise of its powers under Clause (2) of Article 286, the Parliament has enacted the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. In Section 3, thereof, it is laid down that a sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce if the sale or purchase - (a) occasions the movement of goods from one State to another; or (b) is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the goods during their movement from one State to another. Section 3 with its Explanation 1 and Explanation 2 could also be usefully extracted as under Explanation 3 inserted to this Section 3 by Act 28 of 2016 is not relevant for the present purpose.:-

Legislation : Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause, "customs station" and "customs authorities" shall have the same meanings as in the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);

Legislation : "(11) "customs area" means the area of a customs station The words "or a warehouse" inserted at this place by Act 18 of 2017 and includes any area in which imported goods or export goods are ordinarily kept before clearance by Customs Authorities;

Legislation : (13) "customs station" means any customs port, customs airport The words "customs airport, international courier terminal, foreign post office" substituted in place of "customs airport" at this place by Act 7 of 2017 or land customs station;

Legislation : (24) "import manifest" The words "arrival manifest or import manifest" were substituted in place of the words "import manifest" by Act 13 of 2018. or "import report" means the manifest or report required to be delivered under section 30;

Legislation : (26) "importer", in relation to any goods at any time between their importation and the time when they are cleared for home consumption, includes any owner The words "any owner, beneficial owner" were substituted in place of the words "any owner" by Act 7 of 2017. or any person holding himself out to be the importer;

