Statute : 4. Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 empowers the Central Government to take all such measures for the purpose of protecting and improving the quality of the environment and preventing, controlling and abating environmental pollution. One of the measures provided in Section 3 (2) (v) is restriction of areas in which any industries, operations or processes or class of industries shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to certain safeguards. The Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 were made in exercise of power conferred by Sections 6 and 25 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. According to Rule 5, the Central Government may prohibit or restrict the location of industries and the carrying on of processes and operations in different areas.

Statute : 5. In exercise of the power conferred on the Central Government by Sub-Clause (i) and Clause (v) of Sub-Section (2) of Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 read with Clause (b) of Sub rule (3) of Rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India issued a Notification on 14.09.2006 directing construction of new projects or activities or the expansion or modernisation of existing projects or activities listed under the Schedule to the Notification shall be undertaken only after prior environmental clearance from the Central Government or the State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authority. Clause 2 of the said Notification provides that new projects or expansion and modernisation of existing projects listed under the Schedule to the Notification require prior environmental clearance from the concerned regulatory authority. The Schedule to the Notification includes Highways at Item No.7 (f). New National Highways and expansion of National Highways greater than 30 kms involving additional right of way greater than 20 meters or land acquisition and passing through more than one State, require prior environmental clearance. A high-level Committee headed by Member (Environment and Forests, Science and Technology), Planning Commission was constituted by the Ministry of Environment and Forests to review the provisions of the Environmental Impact Assessment Notification dated 14.09.2006 pertaining to environmental clearance for roads, buildings and Special Economic Zone projects. One of the terms of the reference for the Committee was to review the requirement of environmental clearance for Highways expansion projects with a right of way up to 60 meters and length of 200 km. The Committee submitted its report recommending that expansion of National Highways projects up to 100 km involving additional right of way or land acquisition up to 40 meters on existing alignments and 60 meters on realignments or by passes may be exempted from the purview of the Notification. The report of the Committee was accepted and Item 7 (f) in column (3) to the Notification dated 14.09.2006 was substituted as follows: "expansion of National Highways greater than 100 km involving additional right of way or land acquisition greater than 40 meters on existing alignments and 60 meters on realignments or by passes".

Statute : 25. The consternation of the High Court that the Appellant had been remiss in not fulfilling the requirement of reafforestation in spite of giving undertakings for the projects taken up earlier is to be noted. There is an obligation on the part of the Appellant to plant ten trees for each felled tree. The High Court commented upon Coastal Regulation Zones (CRZ) clearances to be taken at certain points. The learned Attorney General submitted that the Appellant has already obtained CRZ clearances, wherever it is required. We have not dealt with the issues relating to acquisition of land being in contravention of the National Highways Act, 1956 as no such submission was made either before the High Court or this Court.

