Statute : This is a society of homebuyers in the projects of JIL who seeks implementation of the projects but carries reservations on some of the terms of the resolution plan, where the requisite compensation in relation to the delayed implementation of the projects by JIL has not been provided, particularly in terms of Section 18 of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 Hereinafter also referred to as 'RERA'. It has also been suggested that the plan of another resolution applicant Suraksha Realty was far better than that of NBCC. This society also has the grievance that NBCC has failed to specify in the resolution plan the treatment and utilisation of the sum of INR 750 crores received from JAL as also 758 acres of land that had come to JIL after the judgment of this Court dated 26.02.2020. This society had filed Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 506 of 2020 before NCLAT against the said order dated 03.03.2020 that stands transferred to this Court and is registered as T.C. (C) No. 243 of 2020. This society has also moved an application, I.A. No. 72707 of 2020 in Civil Appeal No. 3395 of 2020 with the submissions against continuation of NBCC in the proposed 'Interim Monitoring Committee'.

Statute : This Authority, constituted under Section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 Hereinafter also referred to as the 'U.P. Act of 1976' was initially called Taj Expressway Industrial Development Authority 'TEA' for short; subsequently it was renamed as Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority 'YEIDA' for short by a notification dated 11.07.2018. It had been the land provider for execution of various projects by JAL/JIL under the Concession Agreement. The provisions in the resolution plan for dealing with the available parcels of land and for meeting with the contingent liability (as regards payment of additional compensation towards acquisition of land) are the main areas of concern of this Authority, who had filed its objections to the resolution plan. The directions issued in modification of the resolution plan in regard to YEIDA is also one of the major grounds of challenge by the persons/entities standing in favour of the resolution plan.

Statute : 22.2.1. After careful consideration, this Court rejected the proposal submitted on behalf of JAL while explaining that accepting any such proposal on behalf of JAL would cause serious prejudice to the discipline of IBC. In that regard, this Court referred to the provisions contained in Section 29A of the Code and the background in which certain specified persons were made ineligible to be the resolution applicants. We may point out that Section 29A was inserted to the Code along with a few other amendments by way of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2017, promulgated on 23.11.2017. The Ordinance stated in its Preamble, inter alia, that the same was being promulgated because it was considered necessary to provide for prohibition of certain persons from submitting a resolution plan who, on account of their antecedents, may adversely impact the credibility of the process under the Code. This Ordinance later on took the shape of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2017 (No. 8 of 2018) that came into force with retrospective effect from 23.11.2017. This Court, inter alia, observed and explained as under: -

Legislation : 48.4. Fourthly, RBI has moved this Court for permission to initiate an insolvency resolution process. Parliament enacted the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Act 2017 by introducing Section 35-AA and Section 35-AB into the Banking Regulation Act 1949. The amendment empowers the Central Government to authorise RBI to issue directions to any banking company to initiate an insolvency resolution process in respect of a default as understood under the IBC. Such an order was issued by the Central Government on 5-5-2017. The RBI constituted an Internal Advisory Committee (IAC) consisting primarily of its independent Directors. The IAC took up for consideration accounts which were classified either partly or wholly non-performing from amongst the top 500 exposures in the banking system as on 31-3-2017. As a first step, the IAC recommended all such non-performing asset accounts with fund and non-fund based outstandings exceeding Rs. 5000 crores. The IAC has initially taken up twelve accounts involving total exposure of Rs. 1,79,769 crores. JIL was one of the twelve accounts in respect of which directions have been issued to banks for initiating insolvency resolution. Subsequently, the IAC recommended that in respect of those accounts where 60% or more had been classified as NPAs as on 30-6-2017, banks may be directed to implement a viable resolution plan within six months failing which the accounts may be directed for a reference under the IBC by 31-12-2017. JAL was one such entity. No viable resolution plan could be found as a result of which it is also required to be referred for CIRP. RBI has carried out this exercise as a matter of economic policy in its capacity as the prime banking institution in the country, entrusted with a supervisory role, and the power to issue binding directions........"

Statute : 47.1. The NCLT noticed that as per the said CA, the concessionaire (JIL) was to bear the acquisition cost for the project land given to it and in consideration, the concessionaire would obtain the right to develop land for commercial exploitation and the right to operate the Expressway and collect toll for a period of 36 years; and after the expiry of 36 years from the grant of concession, the Expressway shall revert to YEIDA. As to the land for development, it was given on lease for 90 years. It was essentially submitted on behalf of YEIDA that the question, of additional compensation of the land acquired, cropped up with the directions of the Allahabad High Court; and that the liability in regard to the additional compensation in relation to the land acquired and leased to JIL was that of the corporate debtor JIL. It was also pointed out that the question of such additional compensation by JIL was subjected to arbitration proceedings where an award was made to the effect that the corporate debtor need not pay this amount of additional compensation but the award has been questioned by YEIDA in the proceedings under Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 Hereinafter also referred as to 'the Arbitration Act'.-It appears from the corrigendum dated 17.03.2020 and the submissions of the parties that the issue is pending before the Court of District Judge, Gautam Budh Nagar. YEIDA stated its objection to the stipulation in the resolution plan that in case of the award being overruled, YEIDA would collect the amount of additional compensation from the end-users of the project land. It was submitted in this regard that in the CA, two payment components were present - one being of acquisition cost payable by the concessionaire and another being of lease rent, which could be paid by the sub-lessee/end-user as the case may be. It was submitted that given such components, the IRP or the resolution applicant could not insist that YEIDA has to collect the acquisition cost directly from the end-users. It was also submitted that even if the land utilised for Expressway was to revert to YEIDA after 36 years, the CA nevertheless provided as key components that the concessionaire would collect toll for this period and has to bear all the cost including the cost of acquisition; and there was no exemption as regards the land of Expressway. It was also submitted that the resolution applicant cannot split the transferred land into two and say that the payment of additional compensation would be applicable to the land used for development alone. It was further submitted that in view of Clause 18.1 of CA, in case of the necessity to transfer the concessionaire's rights and obligations to an SPV, there has to be necessary documentation involving YEIDA, the concessionaire and the SPV incorporated, so that YEIDA could keep exercising its rights over the SPV concerned; and the resolution applicant or CoC could not have unilaterally transferred the rights and obligations of the corporate debtor to an SPV without the consent of YEIDA. A decision of this Court in the case of Embassy Property Development Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Karnataka and Ors.: 2019 SCC OnLine SC 1542 was also referred to submit that IBC will not have overriding effect on every enactment which is applicable to the transactions related to the corporate debtor. It was further submitted that the requirement of withdrawal of arbitration case could not be thrust upon YEIDA under the cover of the plan; and for the resolution plan having set out so many provisions curtailing the rights held by YEIDA, the same was required to be rejected. However, the Adjudicating Authority also noticed that despite such objections, the counsel appearing on behalf of YEIDA submitted that since the project was for public cause, it would have no objection for approval of the resolution plan provided necessary changes were made in it 'by removing the fall outs from the concession agreement'.

Legislation : "Section 5(1): "Adjudicating Authority", for the purposes of this Part, means National Company Law Tribunal constituted under section 408 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);

Legislation : This Explanation was inserted by Act 26 of 2018 w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018 [Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-clause,-

Legislation : (ii) the expressions, "allottee" and "real estate project" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (d) and (zn) of section 2 of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 (16 of 2016);]

Legislation : Inserted by Act 26 of 2019, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 16.08.2019) [Explanation.- For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a resolution plan may include provisions for the restructuring of the corporate debtor, including by way of merger, amalgamation and demerger;]

Legislation : (g) to perform such other duties as may be specified by the Board. Explanation.-For the purposes of this [section] Substituted by Act 26 of 2018, sec. 14, for "sub-section" (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018), the term "assets" shall not include the following, namely:-

Legislation : This Section 21 has undergone various changes in its amendment by Act 26 of 2018 w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018 which include substitution/omission of certain expressions as also insertion of certain provisions. While leaving aside all the minute details, we may, of course, indicate that by this very amendment, sub-sections (6A) and (6B) were also inserted and sub-sections (7) and (8) were substituted. Before their substitution, sub-sections (7) and (8) stood as under:

Legislation : This Section 24 has also undergone a few changes in its amendment by Act 26 of 2018 w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018 which are essentially of sequel to the amendment of Section 21 Section 24. Meeting of committee of creditors.-(1) The members of the committee of creditors may meet in person or by such electronic means as may be specified.

Legislation : This clause (h) was substituted by Act 8 of 2018, sec. 4, w.r.e.f. 23.11.2017. Clause (h), before substitution, stood as under:

Legislation : This Section 25A was inserted by Act 26 of 2018 (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018). Herein, sub-section (3A) was inserted by Act No. 26 of 2019 (w.e.f. 16.08.2019) Section 25A. Rights and duties of authorised representative of financial creditors.-(1) The authorised representative under sub-section (6) or sub-section (6A) of section 21 or sub-section (5) of section 24 shall have the right to participate and vote in meetings of the committee of creditors on behalf of the financial creditor he represents in accordance with the prior voting instructions of such creditors obtained through physical or electronic means.

Legislation : This Section 30 has undergone various changes in its amendments by Acts 8 of 2018, 26 of 2018 and 26 of 2019. Several aspects relating to the requirements of Section 30 have formed the matters of contention herein. For their relevance, all the concerned amendments are being indicated. Section 30. Submission of resolution plan.-(1) A resolution applicant may submit a resolution plan Inserted by Act 26 of 2018, sec. 23(i) (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018) [along with an affidavit stating that he is eligible under section 29 A] to the resolution professional prepared on the basis of the information memorandum.

Legislation : (a) provides for the payment of insolvency resolution process costs in a manner specified by the Board in priority to the Substituted by Act 26 of 2018, sec. 23 (ii)(A), for "repayment" (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018) [payment] of other debts of the corporate debtor;

Legislation : Substituted by Act 26 of 2019, sec. 6(a), for clause (b) (w.e.f. 16.08.2019). Earlier clause (b) was amended by Act 26 of 2018, sec. 23(ii)(A) (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018). Clause (b), before substitution, stood as under:

Legislation : Explanation 2.-For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby declared that on and from the date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2019, the provisions of this clause shall also apply to the corporate insolvency resolution process of a corporate debtor-

Legislation : Inserted by Act 26 of 2018, sec. 23(ii)(B) (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018) [Explanation.-For the purposes of clause (e), if any approval of shareholders is required under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any other law for the time being in force for the implementation of actions under the resolution plan, such approval shall be deemed to have been given and it shall not be a contravention of that Act or law.]

Legislation : Substituted by Act 8 of 2018, sec. 6, for sub-section (4) (w.r.e.f. 23.11.2017). Sub-section (4), before substitution, stood as under:

Legislation : "(4) The committee of creditors may approve a resolution plan by a vote of not less than seventy five per cent of voting share of the financial creditors." [(4) The committee of creditors may approve a resolution plan by a vote of not less than Substituted by Act 26 of 2018, sec. 23(iii)(a) for "seventy-five" (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018) [sixty-six] per cent. of voting share of the financial creditors, after considering its feasibility and viability, Inserted by Act 26 of 2019, sec. 6(b) (w.e.f. 16.08.2019) [the manner of distribution proposed, which may take into account the order of priority amongst creditors as laid down in sub-section (1) of section 53, including the priority and value of the security interest of a secured creditor] and such other requirements as may be specified by the Board:

Legislation : Inserted by Act 26 of 2018, sec. 23(iii)(b) (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018) [Provided also that the eligibility criteria in section 29A as amended by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018 (Ord. 6 of 2018) shall apply to the resolution applicant who has not submitted resolution plan as on the date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018 (Ord. 6 of 2018).]

Legislation : This Section 31 has also undergone various changes in its amendments by Act 26 of 2018 and 26 of 2019. For their relevance, all the concerned amendments of this Section 31 are also indicated. Section 31. Approval of resolution plan.-(1) If the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan as approved by the committee of creditors under sub-section (4) of section 30 meets the requirements as referred to in sub-section (2) of section 30, it shall by order approve the resolution plan which shall be binding on the corporate debtor and its employees, members, creditors, Inserted by Act 26 of 2019, sec. 7 (w.e.f. 16.08.2019) [including the Central Government, any State Government or any local authority to whom a debt in respect of the payment of dues arising under any law for the time being in force, such as authorities to whom statutory dues are owed,] guarantors and other stakeholders involved in the resolution plan:

Legislation : Inserted by Act 26 of 2018, sec. 24(a) (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018) [Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before passing an order for approval of resolution plan under this sub-section, satisfy that the resolution plan has provisions for its effective implementation.]

Legislation : Inserted by Act 26 of 2018, sec. 24(b) (w.r.e.f. 06.06.2018) [(4) The resolution applicant shall, pursuant to the resolution plan approved under sub-section (1), obtain the necessary approval required under any law for the time being in force within a period of one year from the date of approval of the resolution plan by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (1) or within such period as provided for in such law, whichever is later:

Legislation : Provided that where the resolution plan contains a provision for combination as referred to in section 5 of the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003), the resolution applicant shall obtain the approval of the Competition Commission of India under that Act prior to the approval of such resolution plan by the committee of creditors.]

Legislation : Section 61. Appeals and Appellate Authority.-(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), any person aggrieved by the order of the Adjudicating Authority under this part may prefer an appeal to the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal.

Legislation : (ii) the term "workmen's dues" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).

Legislation : "52. As aforesaid, upon receipt of a "rejected" resolution plan the adjudicating authority (NCLT) is not expected to do anything more; but is obligated to initiate liquidation process under Section 33(1) of the I&B Code. The legislature has not endowed the adjudicating authority (NCLT) with the jurisdiction or authority to analyse or evaluate the commercial decision of CoC much less to enquire into the justness of the rejection of the resolution plan by the dissenting financial creditors. From the legislative history and the background in which the I&B Code has been enacted, it is noticed that a completely new approach has been adopted for speeding up the recovery of the debt due from the defaulting companies. In the new approach, there is a calm period followed by a swift resolution process to be completed within 270 days (outer limit) failing which, initiation of liquidation process has been made inevitable and mandatory. In the earlier regime, the corporate debtor could indefinitely continue to enjoy the protection given under Section 22 of the Sick Industrial Companies Act, 1985 or under other such enactments which has now been forsaken. Besides, the commercial wisdom of CoC has been given paramount status without any judicial intervention, for ensuring completion of the stated processes within the timelines prescribed by the I&B Code. There is an intrinsic assumption that financial creditors are fully informed about the viability of the corporate debtor and feasibility of the proposed resolution plan. They act on the basis of thorough examination of the proposed resolution plan and assessment made by their team of experts. The opinion on the subject-matter expressed by them after due deliberations in CoC meetings through voting, as per voting shares, is a collective business decision. The legislature, consciously, has not provided any ground to challenge the "commercial wisdom" of the individual financial creditors or their collective decision before the adjudicating authority. That is made non-justiciable.

Statute : 88.1. The aforesaid communications of YEIDA and the said G.O. dated 29.08.2014 were challenged by JIL by way of a writ petition before the High Court of Allahabad but, later on, JIL sought permission to withdraw with a view to seek recourse to the alternative remedy of arbitration, as provided in the CA. The High Court of Allahabad, by its order dated 03.11.2016, permitted JIL to withdraw and to pursue the alternative remedy of arbitration As per the facts stated, the said order of High Court was challenged by YEIDA in this Court in D. No. 15058 of 2017, which was dismissed on 01.09.2017. Thereafter, the concessionaire JIL took up the matter in arbitration which led to the arbitral award dated 02.11.2019 in its favour, holding that the demand made by YEIDA was not sustainable. This award has been challenged by YEIDA under Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and those proceedings, being Arbitration Case No. 3 of 2020, are pending in the Court of District Judge, Gautam Budh Nagar. It has also been pointed out that the said G.O. was struck down by the Allahabad High Court in other petitions; and the order so passed by the High Court has been challenged in SLP (Civil) No. 10015-10034 of 2020, pending in this Court.

Statute : 95.5. As regards decision of this Court in the case of Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) v. Abhilash Lal and Ors.: (2019) SCC OnLine SC 1479, which is relied upon by YEIDA, it is submitted that the said decision is not applicable to the facts of the present case because therein, MCGM had not entered into a binding lease agreement containing the terms similar to the CA applicable to the parties herein. Moreover, in the said decision, the statute, i.e., Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai Act, 1888, itself provided that the only way MCGM's properties could be dealt with was through lease or by way of creation of any other interest with the prior permission of MCGM, but there is no similar provision in the U.P. Act of 1976.

Statute : 118.1. The aforesaid Bill ultimately took the shape of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2019, being Act 26 of 2019. This Amendment Act of 2019 not only provided that operational creditors would receive an amount that is not less than liquidation value of their debts or the amount that would have been received if the amount to be distributed under the resolution plan had been distributed in accordance with the order of priorities in Section 53 but, in addition to that, this amendment ensured that the dissenting financial creditors would also be paid a certain minimum amount, which would not be less than the amount to be paid in the event of liquidation; and the Explanation clarified that the distribution in accordance with clause (b) would be fair and equitable to all the creditors. The purport and connotation of this amendment came to be tersely explained by this Court in the case of Essar Steel as under: -

Statute : 123.2. The submission that commercial banks are permitted by the Banking Regulations Act, 1949 to swap the debt for land and equity has its own shortcomings, rather shortfalls. The expressions "payment" and "amount to be paid" and "amount payable" as occurring in Section 30(2) and Regulation 38(1) cannot be interpreted only for the purpose of banks as financial creditors; the provisions refer to "financial creditors" as such and it would be too far stretched to say that these expressions may have different meanings for different financial creditors in the manner that a financial creditor who could accept payment by any mode other than money could be "paid" by that mode and the other financial creditors who cannot accept anything except money shall be receiving payment in cash. This kind of interpretation would not only be reading words but even phrases and provisos in the statutory provisions, which is entirely impermissible.

Statute : 150.1. It is also submitted that the plan is in contravention of Section 230 of the Companies Act, 2013, which provides for the power to compromise or make arrangements with any creditor or member of a company; that the minority shareholders, even if not a part of the CoC, have a right to know and participate in any compromise or arrangement which affects their rights; that they have a right to dissent with any terms of the compromise or arrangement which affects their rights and for that matter, they would be deemed to be dissenting shareholders, who need to be provided a reasonable exit option or opportunity. It is further submitted, while referring to the decision in Essar Steel (supra), that the ultimate decision of what amount to pay may rest with the CoC, but the decision should be made by taking into account the maximum value of the assets of the corporate debtor and after adequately balancing the interests of all stakeholders including operational creditors.

Statute : 151.3. It has further been submitted that in the scheme of IBC, specific and novel method of insolvency resolution is provided wherein, by way of amendment brought about by Act 26 of 2018 w.e.f. 06.06.2018, the Explanation to Section 30(2)(e) has been inserted, providing for deemed approval of shareholders and, therefore, the submissions on behalf of the minority shareholders do not deserve consideration.

Statute : 153.1. As noticed, by way of Explanation to Section 30(2)(e) of the Code, it has been made clear by the legislature that if any approval of shareholders is required under the Companies Act, 2013 or any other law for the time being in force for implementation of actions under the resolution plan, such approval shall be deemed to have been given and it shall not be a contravention of that Act or law. The attempt on the part of minority shareholders to raise objection against the resolution plan simply flies in the face of this Explanation to Section 30(2)(e) of the Code.

Statute : 153.3. Reference to Section 230 of the Companies Act, 2013, which deals with power to compromise or make arrangements with creditors and members is entirely inapt in the context of the present case because no such proceedings for compromise or arrangements are in contemplation. On the contrary, in the present case, the proceedings of CIRP under the Code have reached an advanced stage with approval of resolution plan by the CoC and the Adjudicating Authority.

Statute : 164.2. At this juncture, we may usefully take note of the enunciation of this Court in the case of Pioneer Urban (supra) that has direct bearing on the questions raised herein. The decision in Pioneer Urban was rendered by this Court in the backdrop of challenge to the said amendment made to the Code whereby, the allottees of real estate projects were provided the status of financial creditors by way of insertion of Explanation to sub-clause (f) of clause (8) of Section 5 of the Code and with corresponding insertion of Section 25A as also sub-section (6A) to Section 21. While dealing with such a challenge, in Pioneer Urban (supra), this Court extensively referred to the objects and reasons for these amendments as also their meaning, connotation and effect. The relevant part of the matter, in regard to the issue at hand, is that along with the aforesaid amendment, this Court also examined the amendment of Section 25A with insertion of sub-section (3A) by Act 26 of 2019. This Court explained the connotation of the said amendment and its logic, while rejecting the challenge to Section 21(6A) and 25A of the Code, in the following: -

Legislation : 30. As a matter of fact, the Code and RERA operate in completely different spheres. The Code deals with a proceeding in rem in which the focus is the rehabilitation of the corporate debtor. This is to take place by replacing the management of the corporate debtor by means of a resolution plan which must be accepted by 66% of the Committee of Creditors, which is now put at the helm of affairs, in deciding the fate of the corporate debtor. Such resolution plan then puts the same or another management in the saddle, subject to the provisions of the Code, so that the corporate debtor may be pulled out of the woods and may continue as a going concern, thus benefitting all stakeholders involved. It is only as a last resort that winding up of the corporate debtor is resorted to, so that its assets may be liquidated and paid out in the manner provided by Section 53 of the Code. On the other hand, RERA protects the interests of the individual investor in real estate projects by requiring the promoter to strictly adhere to its provisions. The object of RERA is to see that real estate projects come to fruition within the stated period and to see that allottees of such projects are not left in the lurch and are finally able to realise their dream of a home, or be paid compensation if such dream is shattered, or at least get back monies that they had advanced towards the project with interest. At the same time, recalcitrant allottees are not to be tolerated, as they must also perform their part of the bargain, namely, to pay instalments as and when they become due and payable. Given the different spheres within which these two enactments operate, different parallel remedies are given to allottees under RERA to see that their flat/apartment is constructed and delivered to them in time, barring which compensation for the same and/or refund of amounts paid together with interest at the very least comes their way. If, however, the allottee wants that the corporate debtor's management itself be removed and replaced, so that the corporate debtor can be rehabilitated, he may prefer a Section 7 application under the Code. That another parallel remedy is available is recognised by RERA itself in the proviso to Section 71(1), by which an allottee may continue with an application already filed before the Consumer Protection Fora, he being given the choice to withdraw such complaint and file an application before the adjudicating officer under RERA read with Section 88. In similar circumstances, this Court in Swaraj Infrastructure (P) Ltd. v. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. has held that the Debts Recovery Tribunal proceedings under the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 and winding-up proceedings under the Companies Act, 1956 can carry on in parallel streams (see paras 21 and 22 therein)."

Statute : 175. For what has been discussed above, we hold that the homebuyers as a class having assented to the resolution plan of NBCC, any individual homebuyer or any association of homebuyers cannot maintain a challenge to the resolution plan and cannot be treated as a dissenting financial creditor or an aggrieved person; the question of violation of the provisions of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 does not arise; the resolution plan in question is not violative of the mandatory requirements of the CIRP Regulations; and when the resolution plan comprehensively deals with all the assets and liabilities of the corporate debtor, no housing project could be segregated merely for the reason that the same has been completed or is nearing completion.

