Statute : 4. With effect from 31.12.1947, the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947 (hereafter called "the INC Act") was brought into force. Its objective was to set up a Central Council (hereafter "the council") to establish a uniform standard of training for nurses, midwives and health visitors. Section 16 of the INC Act enables the council to prescribe curricula for training and conditions for admission; Section 10 of the Act enacted that qualifications included in Part I of the Schedule shall be recognized qualifications, and the qualifications included in Part II of the Schedule shall be recognized higher qualifications. The text of the provision is extracted in the footnote below. "10. Recognition of qualifications.--(1) For the purposes of this Act, the qualifications included in 1 of the Schedule shall be recognised qualifications, and the qualifications included in Part II of the Schedule shall be recognised higher qualifications.

Statute : 14. It was further argued that having regard to the provisions of the 1947 Act, which is a central enactment traceable to Entry 66 of List I of the Seventh Schedule, for the purpose of attaining uniformity in standards of education, when the Centre has prescribed a uniform norm for getting admitted to the ANM Course, the states cannot prescribe a different criteria for recruitment to their posts or cadres, and exclude the appellants who conform to the requirements under the 1947 Act. It was pointed out that regulations were framed under Section 16 of the 1947 Act, and that the prescription confining eligibility to those who have completed Intermediate in Science, was untenable.

Statute : 19. Counsel further submitted that the adoption order issued under Section 87 of the U.P. Reorganisation Act, 2000, did not expressly refer to the amendment by which the proviso was inserted on 10.09.1998. It was argued that the advertisement prescribed that candidates should possess the qualifications prescribed by the INC, which the appellants did. Consequently, there could have been no valid basis to reject their candidature.

Statute : 22. Learned counsel for the State submitted that for the purposes of recruitment to civil posts or services within the State, the state has the competence to prescribe eligibility conditions. The question of the rules in the present case conflicting with the standards prescribed under the 1947 Act cannot arise. It was submitted in this regard that the said enactment sets up the Nursing Council, which under Section 16, prescribes the regulations/standards which institutions must fulfill, in order for their courses to be recognized. However, whether the holding of such qualifications per se binds the State to accept them or prescribe additional qualifications or experience for employment within the State is exclusively that of the State's domain. In exercise of this power, the State is competent to prescribe recruitment rules as it did, as the erstwhile State of U.P. did in 1997 when Rule 8 along with other rules were brought into force and subsequently amended in 1998. That rule specifically stated that apart from completing the ANM course, to be eligible for appointment as an ANM in the Uttarakhand Government or its institutions, the concerned candidate also should have qualified in the Science Stream at the 10+2 or equivalent level of education. It was submitted that this condition is reasonable and cannot, by any stretch of imagination be deemed to be repugnant to the provisions of the 1947 Act. The 1947 Act only applies to standards prescribed by the Nursing Council. That council does not have the competence to prescribe the conditions for employment in any given State.

