Precedent Relied : The appellant relies upon the decision of this court in Baldev Singh v. Commissioner of Income-tax, and contends that the exceptional circumstances existing in the latter case, and adverted to in the former, govern the present caseThe facts relating to the filing of the application for reference together with the relevant dates are these.The Tribunal's order was passed by two learned Members, who signed their respective orders on different dates.

Precedent Relied : In all the three cases, reliance was placed by the appellants therein upon the decisions of this court in Dhakeswari Cotton Mills Ltd, v. Commissioner of Income-tax and Baldev Singh v. Commissioner of Income-tax.It was pointed out in the judgments of this court that the two cases relied upon were decided on the special circumstances existing there.

Precedent Relied : In Commissioner of Income-tax v. Ramnarain Sons Ltd. the company was a dealer in shanes and also carried on the business of acqiring managing agencies of other companies.The company acquired the managing agency of a textile mill from Messrs. Sassoon J. David and Co. Ltd. and also agreed as part of the same transaction to buy 2, 507 shares of the mills 1, 507 shares were purchased at Rs.

Precedent Relied : The learned Chief Justice then referred to a judgment of this court reported in Kishan Prasad &amp; Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax, where it was observed" It seems that the object of the assessee company in buying shares was purely to obtain the managing agency of the third mill which no doubt would have been an asset of an enduring nature and would have brought them profits but there was from the inception no intention whatever on the part of the assessee company to re-sell the shares either at a profit or otherwise deal in them."The learned Chief Justice then considered the argument that a block of shares might have to be bought, if at all, at a higher price, and observed as follows" A dealer in shares may succeed in getting a large number of shares at a price less than the market price if the seller is in difficulties and wants to get rid of his shares and to get liquid assets.

Precedent Referred : Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax ?It was laid down by this court that in considering whether a transaction was or was not an adventure in the nature of trade, the problem must be approached in the light of the intention of the assessee, having regard to the" legal requirements which are associated with the concept of trade or business.

Precedent Relied : In Rajputana Textiles (Agencies) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax the converse conclusion was reached.There, on the facts and circumstances of the case, it was held that a particular deal in shares was a commercial venture and had all the attributes of an adventure in the nature of trade.

Precedent Referred : Relying upon the wellknown case of Aron Salomon v. Salomon &amp; Co. Ltd., it was argued before us that each company must be viewed as a separate entity, and that the intention of one company could not be attributed to another company, even though the proprietorship of the companies might be the same.As a proposition affecting companies, it cannot be gainsaid ; but we are not concerned with a theoretical question as to the assessee company being a separate legal entity, but with the question whether a particular loss made by the assessee company is a capital or a revenue loss.

