Precedent Referred : Against the orders passed by the High Court the Commissioner appeals to this Court.This Court in a recent judgment-C. A. Abraham v. Income-tax Officer, Kottayam (1)-held that the Income-tax Officer had power under s. 28 of the Income-tax Act to impose penalty in the course of assessment of a firm even if the firm stood at the date of the order dissolved by the death of one of its partners.In so holding, this Court observed that s. 44 of the Income-tax Act sets up machinery for assessing tax liability of a firm which has discontinued its business and that the expression "assessment" in the different sections of Chapter IV of the Income-tax Act was not used merely in the sense of computation of income, and when s. 44 declared that the partners or members of the firm shall be jointly and severally liable to assessment, it referred to the liability to computation of income under s.23 as well as the application of the procedure for declaration and imposition of tax liability and the machinery for enforcement thereof.Counsel for the appellants, however, contended that C. A. Abraham's case was one of an unregistered firm and the principle of that case has no application where the firm is a registered firm.

Precedent Referred : This Court in C. A. Abraham's case approved the decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Mareddy Krishna Reddy v. Income-tax Officer, Tenali, (1) which was a case of a registered firm, which was dissolved before imposition of penalty.Counsel then argued that in any event, no penalty under s. 28 can be imposed against a registered firm either before or after dissolution, even if the defaults set out in cls.(a), (b) or (c) are proved.This, counsel submits, is the result of the scheme of the Act under s. 23(5) for assessment of tax liability of a registered firm.

Precedent Referred : To the imposition on of a penalty liability to pay tax by the person against whom the penalty is sought to be imposed is therefore not a condition precedent.The Calcutta High Court in Khushiram Murarilal v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Central Calcutta (1) was called upon to deal with the submission made before us in this case.In that case the question which fell to be determined was whether imposition of a penalty on a registered firm under s. 28 (1) (b) of the Income Tax Act was justified in law.

