Precedent : 34. Over four decades ago, in Bihar School Examination Board v. Subhas Chandra Sinha & Others (1970) 1 SCC 648, a three judge Bench of this Court dealt with a case involving a challenge to the decision to cancel the annual secondary school examination in relation to a particular centre in a district in Bihar. The irregularities at the centre were summarised in the following extracts contained in the judgment of this Court:

Precedent : 35. The decision of a three judge Bench of this Court in Anamica Mishra v. UP Public Service Commission, Allahabad (1990) Supp. SCC 692 ("Anamica Mishra") involved recruitment to various posts in the educational services of the State of Uttar Pradesh. There was a two stage recruitment involving a written test and interview. It was found that after the written examination, due to the improper feeding of data into the computer, some candidates who had a better performance in the written examination were not called for interview and candidates who secured lesser marks were not only called for the interview but were finally selected. The entire process was canceled by the Public Service Commission. Dealing with the situation, this Court observed:

Precedent : 36. In Madhyamic Shiksha Mandal, MP v. Abhilash Shiksha Prasar Samiti (1998) 9 SCC 236, the High Court had interfered with the decision of the MP Madhyamic Shiksha Mandal to cancel the entire examination, following the report of the Naib Tehsildar who found that students had been indulging in mass copying. The report of the Naib Tehsildar showed that during the course of a visit to the centre, students were indulging in copying even before the question papers were distributed indicating that there was leakage of the question paper. The teachers had not objected to the students entering the examination hall with books and copying material, indicating their complicity. Holding that the view of the High Court to set aside the cancellation was unsustainable, this Court held:

Precedent : 37. On the other hand, the judgment of a two judge Bench of this Court in Union of India v. Rajesh P U Puthuvalnikathu (2003) 7 SCC 285 involved a situation where a selection list consequent to a written examination, interview and physical fitness test for filling up the posts of constables in the CBI was cancelled, due to allegations of favouritism on the part of the officers conducting the physical efficiency test and irregularities in the written examination. A challenge to the cancellation failed before the Tribunal upon which proceedings were initiated before the High Court. A Committee had been appointed by the Director, CBI, which upon meticulous examination found that 31 candidates who were otherwise ineligible were included in the selection list and an equal number of eligible candidates was ousted. In this backdrop the High Court found that there was no justification to cancel the entire selection when the impact of irregularities which had crept into the evaluation of merits could be identified specifically and was found on verifying the records to have resulted in 31 candidates being selected undeservedly. Upholding the view of the High Court, a two judge Bench of this Court held:

Precedent : 38. The decision in Inderpreet Singh Kahlon v. State of Punjab (2006) 11 SCC 356 ("Inderpreet Singh Kahlon"), again of a two judge Bench, involved a case where it was alleged that the Chairperson of the Punjab Public Service Commission (PSC) had got a large number of persons appointed on the basis of extraneous considerations between 1998 and 2001. The State government cancelled the entire selection for recruitment to the PSC (Executive Branch) and Allied Services 1998. Two Scrutiny Committees were appointed and on the acceptance of their reports, the services of those who were appointed on the basis of the selection made by the Commission against vacancies for 1998 - 2000 came to be terminated. The Full Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petitions filed by the selected candidates. In appeal before this court, Justice SB Sinha enunciated in the course of his judgment the basis on which the services of persons who had put in some years of service could be validly terminated:

Precedent : (a) Union Territory of Chandigarh v. Dilbagh Singh [(1993) 1 SCC 154 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 144 : (1993) 23 ATC 431], SCC at paras 3 and 7.

Precedent : (b) Krishan Yadav v. State of Haryana [(1994) 4 SCC 165 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 937 : (1994) 27 ATC 547], SCC at paras 12, 15 and 22.

Precedent : (c) Union of India v. Anand Kumar Pandey [(1994) 5 SCC 663 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 1235 : (1994) 28 ATC 165], SCC at para 4.

Precedent : (d) Hanuman Prasad v. Union of India [(1996) 10 SCC 742 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 364], SCC at para 4.

Precedent : (e) Union of India v. O. Chakradhar [(2002) 3 SCC 146 : 2002 SCC (L&S) 361], SCC at para 9.

Precedent : (f) B. Ramanjini v. State of A.P. [(2002) 5 SCC 533 : 2002 SCC (L&S) 780], SCC at para 4.

Precedent : (b) Pritpal Singh v. State of Haryana [(1994) 5 SCC 695 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 1239 : (1994) 28 ATC 169]

Precedent : (b) Pramod Lahudas Meshram v. State of Maharashtra [(1996) 10 SCC 749 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 1487] wherein appointments had been made without following the selection procedure.

Precedent : 43. The sequel to the decision Inderpreet Singh Kahlon (supra) is another two judge Bench decision in Joginder Pal v. State of Punjab (2014) 6 SCC 644 ("Joginder Pal"). After the decision in Inderpreet Singh Kahlon (supra), a Committee of three Judges of the High Court was constituted to separate the tainted from non-tainted candidates. As this Court noted in Joginder Pal (supra), the Committee "could pinpoint those candidates who had got selected were selected for oblique considerations". In other words, candidates against whom no taint was found had been selected on merits on their performance in the written examination and interview. Yet the Committee came to the conclusion that the entire process of selection was a product of "a well-planned scheme of deception, forgery and fraud" and, therefore, deserved to be set aside in its entirety. As a result of this report, the original writ petitions were re-heard following the remand by this Court in Inderpreet Singh Kahlon (supra) and were referred to a five judge Bench. The writ petitions of the tainted candidates were dismissed by the High Court but even in the case of non-tainted candidates, it was held that the government was entitled to cancel the entire selection process, once it was found to be vitiated by deception, forgery and fraud. The conclusion of the High Court in regard to the tainted candidates was affirmed in the judgment of this Court in Joginder Pal (supra), authored by Justice AK Sikri. The judgment of this Court held that by the directions which were issued in Inderpreet Singh Kahlon (supra), an effort was required to be made to segregate the tainted from non-tainted candidates. Justice Sikri held that two conclusions of the High Court were "antithetical": once it was found that segregating the tainted from non-tainted candidates is possible and was also achieved, the other conclusion (to set aside the entire process) was incompatible. The Court held that the issue of the entire selection process being vitiated would have arisen only if the findings of the Committee were that it was not possible to distinguish the cases of the tainted from the non-tainted candidates. The Court held that the reasons for holding the entire process should be vitiated were the same as those which had been urged before the High Court earlier. Moreover, a crucial development which had taken place after the remand was that the State had come forward and indicated its willingness to take back candidates who were not tainted and were selected on the basis of merit. In this backdrop, the order passed by the High Court was set aside.

Precedent : 44. The decision in Chairman All India Railway Recruitment Board v. K Shyam Kumar (2010) 6 SCC 614 ("Chairman, Railway Recruitment Board") involved a case where the Board had invited applications for Group-D posts in the South Central Railway. As many as 10.02 lac applications were received of which 5.86 lac applicants were found eligible. The eligible candidates were required to appear at a written test. 3.22 lac candidates appeared of whom 2690 were selected and called for the physical efficiency test. Those who qualified were called for verification of original certificates. At that stage, it was noticed that certain mal-practices took place during the written examination inter alia involving mass copying, leakage of question papers and impersonation. The Vigilance Department recommended that the matter be referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation. The Railway Recruitment Board decided to conduct a retest. This decision was challenged by certain candidates who had taken the first written examination, before the Tribunal. The Tribunal rejected the plea. While considering a challenge to the decision of the Tribunal, the High Court held that there was no reasonable basis to cancel the first selection and directed the Board to finalize the selection on the basis of the first written test save and except for 62 candidates against whom there were allegations of impersonation.

Precedent : 46. A more recent decision of a two judge Bench was in State of Tamil Nadu v. A Kalaimani 2019 SCC Online 1002 ("Kalaimani"). The Teachers Recruitment Board in the State of Tamil Nadu had invited applications for selection to the posts of lecturers in Government Polytechnic Colleges. The written examination was of an objective type and candidates were required to fill up OMR sheets. There were allegations of large scale malpractices in the written examination involving tampering of the OMR sheets. After re-evaluation, discrepancies were found in the entries pertaining to 196 candidates who were beneficiaries of a fraudulent alteration of marks. A decision was taken to cancel the examination which was conducted for selection to the posts of lecturers as the Board was of the view that there were chances of more malpractices being unearthed at a later stage and there was a serious doubt about the purity of the process. The Division Bench of the High Court held that the fabrication of the records pertained only to 196 candidates and when a segregation was possible, the entire examination ought not to be cancelled. In appeal, this Court adverted to the decision in Inderpreet Singh Kahlon (supra) as well as the view which was taken in Gohil Vishvaraj Hanubhai v. State of Gujarat (2017) 13 SCC 621 ("Gohil") where it was held:

