Precedent : 8. Relying on the judgment of this Court in the case of K. Sashidhar vs. Indian Overseas Bank & Ors. (2019) 12 SCC 150, Shri Rohatgi submitted, the opinion on the subject matter expressed by the creditors after due deliberation in CoC meeting through voting, which decision is taken as per the commercial wisdom, is not justiciable before the Adjudicating Authority. He also relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited through Authorised Signatory vs. Satish Kumar Gupta & Ors. (2019) SCC Online SC 1478

Precedent : 9. Shri Rohatgi further submitted, that as held by this Court in Innoventive Industries Ltd. vs. ICICI Bank & Anr. (2018) 1 SCC 407, I&B Code is a complete code in itself. He submitted, that Section 61(2) of the I&B Code provides, that the decision of the Adjudicating Authority (i.e. NCLT) may be challenged before NCLAT within 30 days. He submitted, that an appeal would be tenable within a further period of 15 days, only when NCLAT comes to a satisfaction, that there was a sufficient cause for not filing the appeal within a period of 30 days. He submitted, that since the I&B Code is a complete Code, neither Section 5 nor Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as "the Limitation Act") would be applicable. He submitted, that the judgment of NCLT was delivered on 28.11.2019; certified copies of the same were made available to KIAL on 18.12.2019; and appeals came to be filed on 18.2.2020. He submitted, even if KIAL was given the benefit of the period of 20 days for obtaining the certified copies, still the appeals ought to have been filed on 65th day from the order of NCLT. It would be somewhere on 1st/2nd February, 2020. However, the appeals were filed on 18.2.2020. He submitted, that the litigant like KIAL, which has a team of legal experts at its disposal cannot be heard to say, that they were not aware of the alternate remedy and had bona fide filed the writ petition before the High Court. He submitted, that KIAL is not entitled to the benefit of the exclusion of period between 11.12.2019 i.e. the date of filing of the writ petition and 28.1.2020 i.e. the date of dismissal of the writ petition by the High Court. He submitted, that provisions of Section 14 of the Limitation Act would not at all be applicable and that NCLAT has totally erred in law, in entertaining the appeals which were ex facie beyond limitation.

Precedent : 14. Dr. Singhvi submitted, that the conduct of KIAL is totally indefensible. He submitted, that it amounts to taking chances in the process and after having failed there, then to challenge the process. He submitted, that KIAL had submitted its revised plans after knowing, that it was competing with Kalpraj, and only after it was not successful in the process has chosen to challenge the same. He submitted, that the revised Resolution Plan submitted by KIAL does not state, that it is without prejudice to its contention, that the Resolution Plans submitted after 8.1.2019 ought not to have been considered by RP and CoC. He submitted, that even if such words were used they would not be significant. He relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of ITC Ltd. Vs. Blue Coast Hotels Limited & Ors. (2018) 15 SCC 99 and Tarapore & Company vs. Cochin Shipyard Ltd., Cochin & Anr. (1984) 2 SCC 680 (PARA 33), in this regard.

Precedent : 15. Dr. Singhvi further submitted, that Section 238 of the I&B Code provides, that the provisions of the Code shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. He therefore submitted, that the provisions as contained in Section 61(2) of the I&B Code, which provides, that an appeal has to be filed within 30 days with a further enhanced period of 15 days, when NCLAT is satisfied, that a sufficient cause existed for not filing the appeal within 30 days, has to be strictly construed. He relied on the judgment of NCLAT in the case of Kumar Dutta prop. K.D. Trading vs. Simplex Infrastructure Ltd. 2019 SCC Online NCLAT 575 and Asha Goyal vs. Pharma Traders Pvt. Ltd. 2019 SCC Online NCLAT 150 in that regard.

Precedent : (i) Union of India vs. Popular Construction Co. (2001) 8 SCC 470,

Precedent : (ii) Singh Enterprises vs. Commissioner of Central Excise, Jamshedpur & Ors. (2008) 3 SCC 70, and

Precedent : (iii) Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board vs. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors. (2010) 5 SCC 23

Precedent : 17. Dr. Singhvi further submitted, that NCLAT in two cases in Radhika Mehra vs. Vaayu Infrastructure LLP & Ors. 2020 SCC Online NCLAT 532 and Dhirendra Kumar vs. Randstand India Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. 2019 SCC Online NCLAT 444 has held, that the provisions of Section 14 of the Limitation Act cannot be made applicable to the appeal preferred under Section 67 of the I&B Code.

Precedent : 18. Dr. Singhvi submitted, that in any case, it cannot be said, that filing of the writ petition was a bona fide act of KIAL. He submitted, that KIAL, which was armed with a battery of legal counsel, was very well aware, that it had an alternate remedy of filing an appeal before NCLAT and therefore, was not entitled to take an umbrella of Section 14 of the Limitation Act. In this regard, he relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of Neeraj Jhanji vs. Commissioner of Customs & Central Excise (2015) 12 SCC 695.

Precedent : 20. Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of Deutsche Bank, which is appellant in one of the appeals and CoC, which is respondent in some of the appeals submitted, that the order passed by NCLAT was not sustainable inasmuch as, CoC was not made a party before NCLAT. He submitted, that CoC had acted bona fide only with a view of achieving maximization, by permitting Kalpraj to participate. He submitted, that CoC had approved the Resolution Plan submitted by Kalpraj by a thumping majority of 84.36%. He submitted, that the commercial wisdom of CoC is not open to judicial scrutiny by the Adjudicating Authority, unless it falls within the statutory parameters and as such, NCLT has rightly rejected the objection of KIAL and NCLAT has erred in interfering with the same. He submitted, that no prejudice is caused to KIAL on account of deviation of the procedure, if any. In this regard, he relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of G.J. Fernandez vs. State of Karnataka & Ors. (1990) 2 SCC 488. SUBMISSION OF SHRI SHYAM DIVAN, LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL APPEARING FOR RP

Precedent : 22. Shri C.A. Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel appearing for Fourth Dimension Solutions Limited, appellant in Civil Appeal D.No.24125 of 2020, which claims to have the highest amount recoverable from the Corporate Debtor submitted, that the said appellant is not concerned with the dispute between the parties, which is the subject matter of consideration in the present appeals. It is further contended, that the appellants' dues are subject matter of pending arbitration proceeding between the Corporate Debtor and the appellants and is yet to attain finality, so as to liquidate the dues. It is aggrieved by the direction given in paragraph 39 by NCLT in its order dated 28.11.2019 in M.A. No.691 of 2019. The learned Senior Counsel submitted, that by the said direction it is directed, that the Resolution Applicant who stepped into the shoes of Corporate Debtor subsequent to the approval of the Resolution Plan by it, shall not be held responsible for any outstanding statutory dues and other claims for the period before commencement of CIRP. In the submission of Shri Sundaram, this direction is prejudicial to the appellant, which is the largest operational creditor entitled to recover an amount of 551 crores (approx..) from the Corporate Debtor. It is also contended, that the claim of the appellant - Fourth Dimension, though has been shown in the information memorandum by RP, it has not been considered by CoC or any of the applicants in their resolution plan. He relied on the judgment/order dated 16.11.2020 passed by this Court in Civil Appeal No. 2798 of 2020 [NTPC Ltd. (Simhadri Project) vs. Rajiv Chakraborty]

Precedent : (i) Whirlpool Corporation vs. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai & Ors. (1998) 8 SCC 1,

Precedent : (ii) Babu Ram Prakash Chandra Maheshwari vs. Antarim Zilla Parishad Muzaffar Nagar (1969) 1 SCR 518; and

Precedent : (iii) Nivedita Sharma vs. Cellular Operators Association of India & Ors. (2011) 14 SCC 337

Precedent : 28. Learned Senior Counsel submitted, that the purpose behind Article 14 of the Limitation Act is to advance justice and not to halt justice. He submitted, that Section 14 enables a party to get the benefit of the period for which it was bona fide prosecuting the remedy before a wrong forum. Learned counsel submitted, that a liberal approach is required to be given to the provisions of Article 14. Learned counsel relied on the judgments of this Court in the case of Ketan V. Parekh vs. Special Director, Directorate of Enforcement & Anr. (2011) 15 SCC 30, M.P. Steel Corporation vs. Commissioner of Central Excise (2015) 7 SCC 58 and Union of India & Ors. vs. West Coast Paper Mills Ltd. & Anr. (2004) 3 SCC 458 in this regard.

Precedent : 31. Learned counsel further submitted, that the contention, that KIAL is a subsidiary of Kotak Bank and that Kotak Bank had also not objected to Kalpraj submitting its Resolution Plan and therefore the same amounted to acquiescence is also not correct. He submitted, that firstly, in the reply filed by RP to the application filed by KIAL in NCLT, there is no plea regarding the Kotak Bank's consensus. He however submitted, that in any case in view of the judgment of this Court in the case of Vodafone International Holdings BV vs. Union of India & Anr. (2012) 6 SCC 613, both KIAL and Kotak Bank are different corporate entities and any act of Kotak Bank cannot bind KIAL.

Precedent : 34. Insofar as the judgment of NCLAT in the case of Binani Industries Limited vs. Bank of Baroda & Anr. 2018 SCC Online NCLAT 565 is concerned, learned counsel submitted, that the said judgment is totally distinguishable inasmuch as, in the said case both applicants had submitted their plans and revised plans within the stipulated period.

Precedent : 45. The conditions that are required to be fulfilled for invoking the provisions of Section 14 of the Limitation Act have been succinctly spelt out in various judgments of this Court including the one in Consolidated Engineering Enterprises vs. Principal Secretary, Irrigation Department and others (2008) 7 SCC 169, which read thus:

Precedent : 46. Perusal of the aforesaid conditions would make it amply clear, that one of the conditions that is required to be fulfilled is that both the proceedings are in a court. The question as to whether the provisions of Section 14 of the Limitation Act would also be applicable to the quasi-judicial forums as against the court, fell for consideration before this Court in the case of M.P. Steel Corporation (supra). This Court after an elaborate survey of the various judgments of this Court, including judgment in the cases of Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi vs. Employees of the Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi AIR 1950 SC 188 = 1950 SCR 459, Town Municipal Council, Athani vs. Presiding Officer, Labour Courts, Hubli and others etc. (1969) 1 SCC 873, Nityananda M. Joshi and others vs. Life Insurance Corporation of India and others (1969) 2 SCC 199, Commissioner of Sales Tax. U.P., Lucknow vs. Parson Tools and Plants, Kanpur (1975) 4 SCC 22, Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum vs. T.P. Kunhaliumma (1976) 4 SCC 634, Officer on Special Duty (Land Acquisition) and another vs. Shah Manilal Chandulal and others (1996) 9 SCC 414 and Consolidated Engineering Enterprises (supra) held, that the word "court" in Section 14 takes its colour from the preceding words "civil proceedings". It was therefore held, that the Limitation Act including Section 14 would not apply to appeals filed before a quasi-judicial Tribunal. It was held, that since the appeal as mentioned in Section 128 of the Customs Act is not before a Court, the provisions of Section 14 would not be applicable.

Precedent : 48. This Court in M.P. Steel Corporation (supra) further observed, that the judgment of this Court in the case of Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. vs. Madan Lal Das & Sons, Bareilly (1976) 4 SCC 464 had not considered the law laid down in Parson Tools and Plants (supra) and the other judgments nor the aforesaid decisions were pointed out to the Court and therefore, the said judgment in the case of Madan Lal Das & Sons (supra) was not an authority for the proposition, that the Limitation Act would apply to Tribunals.

Precedent : "....However, this does not conclude the issue. There is authority for the proposition that even where Section 14 may not apply, the principles on which Section 14 is based, being principles which advance the cause of justice, would nevertheless apply. We must never forget, as stated in Bhudan Singh v. Nabi Bux [(1969) 2 SCC 481 : (1970) 2 SCR 10] that justice and reason is at the heart of all legislation by Parliament. This was put in very felicitous terms by Hegde, J. as follows: (SCC p. 485, para 9)

Precedent : 39. This is why the principles of Section 14 were applied in J. Kumaradasan Nair v. Iric Sohan [(2009) 12 SCC 175 : (2009) 4 SCC (Civ) 656] to a revision application filed before the High Court of Kerala. The Court held: (SCC pp. 180-81, paras 16-18)

Precedent : '21. In Consolidated Engg. Enterprises v. Irrigation Deptt. [(2008) 7 SCC 169] this Court held: (SCC p. 181, para 22)

Precedent : See Shakti Tubes Ltd. v. State of Bihar [(2009) 1 SCC 786 : (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 370].'"

Precedent : 50. Thus, this Court relying on the earlier judgments in the cases of Bhudan Singh and another vs. Nabi Bux and another (1969) 2 SCC 481, J. Kumaradasan Nair and another vs. Iric Sohan and others (2009) 12 SCC 175, and Consolidated Engineering Enterprises (supra) observed, that the object of enacting the legislation is to advance public welfare. The entire legislative process is influenced by considerations of justice and reason. Justice and reason constitute the great general legislative intent in every piece of legislation. It has been held by this Court, that in the absence of some other indication that the harsh or ridiculous effect was actually intended by the legislature, there is little reason to believe, that it represents the legislative intent. It is further observed, that the provisions contained in Sections 5 and 14 of the Limitation Act are meant for grant of relief, where a person has committed some mistake. In J. Kumaradasan Nair (supra), it has been observed, that when sub-section (2) of Section 14 of the Limitation Act per se is not applicable, the same would not mean, that the principles akin thereto would not be applicable.

Precedent : '54.... Even when there is cause to apply Section 14, the limitation period continues to be three months and not more, but in computing the limitation period of three months for the application under Section 34(1) of the AC Act, the time during which the applicant was prosecuting such application before the wrong court is excluded, provided the proceeding in the wrong court was prosecuted bona fide, with due diligence. Western Builders [State of Goa v. Western Builders, (2006) 6 SCC 239] therefore lays down the correct legal position.'

Precedent : "It is a well-established proposition of law that when an alternative and equally effi-cacious remedy is open to a litigant he should be required to pursue that remedy and not to invoke the special jurisdiction of the High Court to issue a prerogative writ. It is true that the existence of a statutory remedy does not affect the ju-risdiction of the High Court to issue a writ. But, as observed by this Court in Rashid Ahmed v. The Municipal Board, Kairana [(1950) SCR 566], "the existence of an adequate legal remedy is a thing to be taken into consideration in the matter of granting writs" and where such a rem-edy exists it will be a sound exercise of discretion to refuse to interfere in a writ petition unless there are good grounds therefore. But it should be remembered that the rule of exhaustion of statutory remedies before a writ is granted is a rule of self imposed limitation, a rule of policy, and discretion rather than a rule of law and the court may therefore in excep-tional cases issue a writ such as a writ of certiorari notwithstanding the fact that the statutory remedies have not been ex-hausted."

Precedent : "There are at least two well-recognised exceptions to the doctrine with regard to the exhaustion of statutory remedies. In the first place, it is well-settled that where proceedings are taken before a Tri-bunal under a provision of law, which is ultra vires, it is open to a party aggrieved thereby to move the High Court un-der Art. 226 for issuing appropriate writs for quashing them on the ground that they are incompetent, without his being obliged to wait until those proceedings run their full course.--(See the decisions of this Court in Carl Still G.m.b.H. v. The State of Bihar [A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 1615] and The Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. The State Bihar [(1955) 2 S.C.R. 603]. In the second place, the doctrine has no appli-cation in a case where the impugned or-der has been made in violation of the principles of natural justice (See The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohammad Nooh [(1958) S.C.R. 595]."

Precedent : 63. A similar view has been reiterated in the judgment of this Court in the case of Nivedita Sharma vs. Cellular Operators Association of India (supra).

Precedent : "27. The contention that in view of the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Union of India v. Popular Construction Co. [(2001) 8 SCC 470] the Court should hold that the provisions of Section 14 of the Limitation Act would not apply to an application filed under Section 34 of the Act, is devoid of substance. In the said decision what is held is that Section 5 of the Limitation Act is not applicable to an application challenging an award under Section 34 of the Act. Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act inter alia provides that where any special or local law prescribes, for any application, a period of limitation different from the period prescribed by the Schedule, the provisions contained in Sections 4 to 24 shall apply only insofar as, and to the extent to which, they are not expressly excluded by such special or local law. On introspection, the Division Bench of this Court held that the provisions of Section 5 of the Limitation Act are not applicable to an application challenging an award. This decision cannot be construed to mean as ruling that the provisions of Section 14 of the Limitation Act are also not applicable to an application challenging an award under Section 34 of the Act. As noticed earlier, in the Act of 1996, there is no express provision excluding application of the provisions of Section 14 of the Limitation Act to an application filed under Section 34 of the Act for challenging an award.

Precedent : 75. Similarly, reliance placed by the learned counsel for the appellants on the judgment of this Court in the case of Commissioner of Customs and Central Excise vs. Hongo India Private Limited and another (2009) 5 SCC 791, would also not help the appellants inasmuch as, the question, that fell for consideration there was, with regard to the applicability of Section 5 of the Limitation Act to a reference application provided under Section 35-H(1) of the unamended Central Excise Act, 1944.

Precedent : 77. For the same reasons, we find, that the judgment relied on by the appellants in the case of Bengal Chemists and Druggists Association vs. Kalyan Chowdhury (2018) 3 SCC 41 would also not be applicable to the facts of the present case inasmuch as, the said judgment also considered the applicability of Section 5 of the Limitation Act to an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal provided under Section 421(3) and 433 of the Companies Act, 2013.

Precedent : "3. The very filing of writ petition by the petitioner in the Delhi High Court against the order-in-original passed by the Com-missioner of Customs, Kanpur indicates that the petitioner took a chance in ap-proaching the High Court at Delhi which had no territorial jurisdiction in the mat-ter. We are satisfied that filing of the writ petition or for that matter, appeal before the Delhi High Court was not at all bona fide. We are in agreement with the obser-vations made by the Allahabad High Court in the impugned order [Neeraj Jhanji v. CCE & Customs, Custom Appeal Defective 16 of 2012, order dated 6-8-2012 (All)]. The Allahabad High Court has rightly dismissed the petitioner's ap-plication of condonation of delay and con-sequently the appeal as time barred."

Precedent : 81. The judgment of this Court in the case of Ketan V. Parekh (supra) is relied upon by both the parties. The question, that arose for consideration in the said case was with regard to applicability of Section 14 of the Limitation Act to an Appeal from Order of an Appellate Tribunal as provided under Section 35 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999. This Court relying on the earlier judgment in the case of Consolidated Engineering Enterprises (supra) and State of Goa vs. Western Builders (2006) 6 SCC 239 held, that Section 14 can be invoked in an appropriate case for exclusion of the time, during which the aggrieved person may have prosecuted with due diligence a remedy before a wrong forum. However, on facts and on the averments made in the pleadings, this Court came to the conclusion, that there was not even a whisper in the applications filed by the appellants, that they had been prosecuting remedy before a wrong forum i.e. the Delhi High Court with due diligence and in good faith. It will be relevant to refer to the following paragraphs of the said judgment.

Precedent : 33. It is not possible to believe that as on 7-11-2007, the appellants and their advocates were not aware of the judgment of this Court in Ambica Industries v. CCE [(2007) 6 SCC 769] whereby dismissal of the writ petition by the Delhi High Court on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction was confirmed and it was observed that the parties cannot be allowed to indulge in forum shopping. It has not at all surprised us that after having made a prayer that the writ petitions filed by them be treated as appeals under Section 35, two of the appellants filed applications for recall of that order. No doubt, the learned Single Judge accepted their prayer and the Division Bench confirmed the order of the learned Single Judge but the manner in which the appellants prosecuted the writ petitions before the Delhi High Court leaves no room for doubt that they had done so with the sole object of delaying compliance with the direction given by the Appellate Tribunal and by no stretch of imagination it can be said that they were bona fide prosecuting remedy before a wrong forum. Rather, there was total absence of good faith, which is sine qua non for invoking Section 14 of the Limitation Act."

Precedent : 84. This Court recently in the judgment of Embassy Property Developments Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Karnataka and Others 2019 SCC Online 1542 had an occasion to consider a similar issue. We find it apposite to refer to the question framed by this Court, which reads thus:

Precedent : 93. In this respect, it will be relevant to refer to paragraphs 89 and 90 of the judgment of this Court in the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and another vs. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another (1986) 3 SCC 156.

Precedent : 96. The said principle of law has been subsequently followed in various judgments of this Court including the one in the case of Assistant General Manager and others vs. Radhey Shyam Pandey (2020) 6 SCC 438.

Precedent : 98. It may be argued, that the judgment in the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited (supra) arose from a case involving a statutory corporation, which was an instrumentality of State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution. However, recently, this Court in the case of Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Limited vs. Govindan Raghavan (2019) 5 SCC 725 while construing the term of contract between a builder and a flat purchaser observed thus:

Precedent : 105. As early as in 1957 in the case of Manak Lal vs. Dr. Prem Chand 1957 SCR 575 = AIR 1957 SC 425 an advocate was held guilty for professional misconduct by a Tribunal of Three Members. The matter was argued before the High Court. An objection was taken before the High Court, that one of the members had appeared on behalf of the complainant and therefore, he was disqualified from acting as a member of the Tribunal. A question arose before this Court, that since such an objection was not taken before the Tribunal, whether it amounted to waiver. This Court observed thus:

Precedent : "It is true that waiver cannot always and in every case be inferred merely from the failure of the party to take the objection. Waiver can be inferred only if and after it is shown that the party knew about the relevant facts and was aware of his right to take the objection in question. As Sir John Romilly, M.R., has observed in Vyvyan v. Vyvyan [(1861) 30 Beav 65, 74 : 54 ER 813, 817] "waiver or acquiescence, like election, presupposes that the person to be bound is fully cognizant of his rights, and, that being so, he neglects to enforce them, or chooses one benefit instead of another, either, but not both, of which he might claim".

Precedent : 108. In the case of Krishna Bahadur vs. Purna Theatre and others (2004) 8 SCC 229, the appellant was appointed in the post of messenger-cum-bearer in the establishment of the respondent. A disciplinary proceeding was initiated against him wherein, he was found guilty and he was dismissed from service. The Industrial Tribunal set aside the dismissal with full back wages and compensation. The appellant was permitted to join his duties but back wages were not paid. He was again retrenched from services and a sum of Rs. 9,030/- was paid as retrenchment compensation, which the appellant was said to have received under protest. A trade union took the cause of the appellant, inter alia, on the ground of contravention of Section 25-G of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, so also on the ground of insufficiency of the amount of compensation paid to the appellant in terms of Section 25-F(b) thereof. An industrial dispute was raised before the Assistant Labour Commissioner, which failed, whereupon the Industrial Tribunal was approached by the appellant. In the meantime, the appellant had also initiated a proceeding under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 which ended in an amicable settlement, according to which, the appellant agreed to receive a sum of Rs. 39,000/- as full and final settlement.

Precedent : 111. This Court in the case of State of Punjab vs. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar and others (2011) 14 SCC 770 had an occasion to consider an issue, as to when an issue of bias was not raised by the party at the earliest possible, if it is aware of it and knows its right to raise the said issue, would it amount to waiver or not. This Court while considering the earlier judgments observed thus:

Precedent : 38. Thus, in a given case if a party knows the material facts and is conscious of his legal rights in that matter, but fails to take the plea of bias at the earlier stage of the proceedings, it creates an effective bar of waiver against him. In such facts and circumstances, it would be clear that the party wanted to take a chance to secure a favourable order from the official/court and when he found that he was confronted with an unfavourable order, he adopted the device of raising the issue of bias. The issue of bias must be raised by the party at the earliest. (See Pannalal Binjraj v. Union of India [AIR 1957 SC 397] and P.D. Dinakaran (1) v. Judges Enquiry Committee [(2011) 8 SCC 380].)

Precedent : 39. In Power Control Appliances v. Sumeet Machines (P) Ltd. [(1994) 2 SCC 448] this Court held as under: (SCC p. 457, para 26)

Precedent : 40. Inaction in every case does not lead to an inference of implied consent or acquiescence as has been held by this Court in P. John Chandy & Co. (P) Ltd. v. John P. Thomas [(2002) 5 SCC 90]. Thus, the Court has to examine the facts and circumstances in an individual case.

Precedent : 41. Waiver is an intentional relinquishment of a right. It involves conscious abandonment of an existing legal right, advantage, benefit, claim or privilege, which except for such a waiver, a party could have enjoyed. In fact, it is an agreement not to assert a right. There can be no waiver unless the person who is said to have waived, is fully informed as to his rights and with full knowledge about the same, he intentionally abandons them. (Vide Dawsons Bank Ltd. v. Nippon Menkwa Kabushiki Kaisha [(193435) 62 IA 100 : AIR 1935 PC 79], Basheshar Nath v. CIT [AIR 1959 SC 149], Mademsetty Satyanarayana v. G. Yelloji Rao [AIR 1965 SC 1405], Associated Hotels of India Ltd. v. S.B. Sardar Ranjit Singh [AIR 1968 SC 933], Jaswantsingh Mathurasingh v. Ahmedabad Municipal Corpn. [1992 Supp (1) SCC 5], Sikkim Subba Associates v. State of Sikkim [(2001) 5 SCC 629 : AIR 2001 SC 2062] and Krishna Bahadur v. Purna Theatre [(2004) 8 SCC 229 : 2004 SCC (L&S) 1086 : AIR 2004 SC 4282].)

Precedent : 42. This Court in Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay v. Dr Hakimwadi Tenants' Assn. [1988 Supp SCC 55 : AIR 1988 SC 233] considered the issue of waiver/acquiescence by the non-parties to the proceedings and held: (SCC p. 65, paras 14-15)

Precedent : 113. In the case of Galada power and Telecommunication limited vs. United India Insurance Company Limited and another (2016) 14 SCC 161, this Court had an occasion to consider the question, as to whether the insurer has waived its right on the basis of claim hit by clause relating to duration.

Precedent : 127. Dr. Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of Kalpraj relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of ITC Limited vs. Blue Coast Hotels Limited and others (supra), wherein it is held, that even if a debtor has used the word "without prejudice" it has no significance. However, in the said case, the debtor had acknowledged the debt even after action was initiated under the Act and even after payment of a smaller sum. In this background, it was held, that the words "without prejudice" would have no significance. As such, the said case would not be applicable to the facts of the present case.

Precedent : 130. This question has been squarely answered by this Court in the case of Vodafone International Holdings BV vs. Union of India and another (2012) 6 SCC 613. It will be apposite to refer to the following observation of this Court:

Precedent : "257. The legal relationship between a holding company and WOS is that they are two distinct legal persons and the holding company does not own the assets of the subsidiary and, in law, the management of the business of the subsidiary also vests in its Board of Directors. In Bacha F. Guzdar v. CIT [AIR 1955 SC 74], this Court held that shareholders' only right is to get dividend if and when the company declares it, to participate in the liquidation proceeds and to vote at the shareholders' meeting. Refer also to Carew and Co. Ltd. v. Union of India [(1975) 2 SCC 791] and Carrasco Investments Ltd. v. Directorate of Enforcement [(1994) 79 Comp Cas 631 (Del)]."

Precedent : 136. The aforesaid provisions have been recently considered in three judgments of this Court. The first one, being in the case of K. Sashidhar (supra), to which one of us (A.M. Khanwilkar, J.) was a party, and two other judgments, delivered by three Judges Bench of this Court, in the cases of Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited through Authorised Signatory (supra) and Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs. Padmanabhan Venkatesh and others (2020) 11 SCC 467.

Precedent : 141. After considering the judgment of this Court in the case of Arcelormittal India Private Limited vs. Satish Kumar Gupta and others (2019) 2 SCC 1 and the relevant provisions of the I&B Code, this court further observed in K. Sashidhar (supra) thus:

Precedent : "30. The appellate authority has, in our opinion, proceeded on equitable perception rather than commercial wisdom. On the face of it, release of assets at a value 20% below its liquidation value arrived at by the valuers seems inequitable. Here, we feel the Court ought to cede ground to the commercial wis-dom of the creditors rather than assess the resolution plan on the basis of quantitative analysis. Such is the scheme of the Code. Section 31(1) of the Code lays down in clear terms that for final approval of a resolution plan, the adjudicating authority has to be satisfied that the requirement of sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the Code has been com-plied with. The proviso to Section 31(1) of the Code stipulates the other point on which an adjudicating authority has to be satisfied. That factor is that the resolution plan has provisions for its implementation. The scope of interference by the adjudicating authority in limited judicial review has been laid down in Essar Steel [Essar Steel India Ltd. Commit-tee of Creditors v. Satish Kumar Gupta, (2020) 8 SCC 531], the relevant passage (para 54) of which we have reproduced in earlier part of this judgment. The case of MSL in their appeal is that they want to run the company and infuse more funds. In such circumstances, we do not think the appellate authority ought to have interfered with the order of the adjudicating authority in direct-ing the successful resolution applicant to en-hance their fund inflow upfront."

