Precedent : While addressing the fourth issue, the High Court placed reliance on a decision of this Court in Vipulbhai M. Chaudhary v. Gujarat Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation Limited & Ors. (2015) 8 SCC 1 and held that no confidence motion can be maintained even in absence of provision therefor in the bye-laws. The relevant portion of the impugned judgment is reproduced below:

Precedent : 25. The thrust of the arguments of the appellants is that in terms of clause 1(c) of the bye-laws of the Society, a person automatically gets inducted as member of the Society upon submitting application in the prescribed form along with prescribed fees. As such, the appellants were validly inducted as members of the Society as they had duly submitted their applications in form prescribed under the bye-laws of the Society. Reliance was placed upon the dictum of this Court in Zoroastrian Cooperative Housing Society Ltd. & Anr. v. District Registrar, Cooperative Societies (Urban) & Ors. (2005) 5 SCC 632 to contend that the right to membership in any Society would have to be tested on the touchstone of the bye-laws and nothing else.

Precedent : 27. It was submitted that reliance upon the decision of this Court in Vipulbhai (supra) by the High Court was misplaced as the said decision concerned a co-operative society, whereas the Society in this case is registered under the 1860 Act. Further, it was urged that the said decision was based on the 97th Amendment to the Constitution of India For short, "the 97th Amendment", which had been struck down by a Division Bench of Gujarat High Court in Rajendra N. Shah v. Union of India & Anr. 2013 SCC OnLine Guj 2242. Reliance was then placed on the dictum of this Court in Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. v. Union of India & Anr. (2004) 6 SCC 254 to contend that though an appeal had been preferred before this Court against the decision of Gujarat High Court in Rajendra N. Shah (supra), the same is pending adjudication (vide Civil Appeal Nos. 9108-9109 of 2014) and there being no order suspending the operation of the said judgment, the 97th Amendment is not currently in existence. Therefore, the decision in Vipulbhai (supra) was inapplicable. The appellants also relied upon a decision of Delhi High Court in Mukund L. Abhyankar v. Chief Executive Officer, National Federation of Urban Co-op. Bank and Credit Societies Ltd. & Ors. (2017) 241 DLT 358 to urge that the fundamental basis of the decision in Vipulbhai (supra) stood fully eroded without the 97th Constitutional Amendment.

Precedent : 31. It was then contended that the High Court had rightly held that in democratically constituted institutions, the office bearers continue to hold office during the pleasure of the members and they can be unseated despite any express provision in the bye-laws. Reliance was placed upon a decision of this Court in T. Varghese George v. Kora K. George & Ors. (2012) 1 SCC 369 to urge that the Managing Committee had no power to take any policy decision once a no confidence motion is moved, as that would be against their fiduciary duties towards the Society. It was submitted that any decision taken after the no confidence motion is moved ought to be tested on the touchstone of 'legal malice' or malice in fact, whilst relying upon the decision of this Court in State of Punjab & Anr. v. Gurdial Singh & Ors. (1980) 2 SCC 471.

