Precedent : (i) The de-reservation of forest land for the construction of the Hotel-cum-Restaurant structure in the Bus Stand Complex was in violation of: (i) Section 2(i) of the Forest Act; and (ii) the order dated 13 November 2000 issued by this Court in Centre for Environmental Law, WWF - I vs Union of India Writ Petition (Civil) No. 337 of 1995, which held that further land shall not be de-reserved pending further orders from this Court;

Precedent : (ii) As such, the actions of the appellant and the second respondent in deliberately violating the provisions of the Forest Act constitute a violation of the "environmental rule of law" enunciated by this Court in Hanuman Laxman Aroskar vs Union of India (2019) 15 SCC 401; and

Precedent : 48. In its decision in Hanuman Laxman Aroskar vs Union of India (supra), this Court, speaking through one of us (DY Chandrachud, J.) recognized the importance of protecting the environmental rule of law. The court observed:

Precedent : 54. In a recent decision of this Court in Bengaluru Development Authority vs Sudhakar Hegde 2020 SCC OnLine SC 328, this Court, speaking through one of us (DY Chandrachud, J.) held:

Precedent : 55. In Lal Bahadur vs State of Uttar Pradesh (2018) 15 SCC 407., this Court underscored the principles that are the cornerstone of our environmental jurisprudence, as emerging from a settled line of precedent: the precautionary principle, the polluter pays principle and sustainable development. This Court further noted the importance of judicial intervention for ensuring environmental protection. In a recent decision in State of Meghalaya & others vs All Dimasa Students Union (2019) 8 SCC 177., this Court reiterated the key principles of environmental jurisprudence in India, while awarding costs of Rs. 100 crores on the State of Meghalaya for engaging in illegal coal mining.

Precedent : 59. We are not traversing unexplored territory. In the past, this Court has clamped down on illegal activities on reserved forest land specifically, and in violation of environmental laws more generally, and taken to task those responsible for it. In a recent three-judge bench decision of this Court in the case of Hospitality Association of Mudumalai vs In Defence of Environment and Animals 2020 SCC OnLine SC 838., this Court was confronted with a situation involving illegal commercial activities taking place in an elephant corridor. Justice S. Abdul Nazeer, speaking for the Court, held as follows:

Precedent : 60. In Goel Ganga Developers India Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India (2018) 18 SCC 257., this Court dealt with a situation in which the project proponent had engaged in construction that was contrary to the environmental clearance granted to it. Coming down on the project proponent, a two-judge bench, speaking through Justice Deepak Gupta, held as follows:

Precedent : 61. In M.C. Mehta vs Union of India (2018) 18 SCC 397., a two judge Bench of this Court held that the land notified under Punjab Land Preservation Act, 1900 in the Kant Enclave was to be treated as "forest land". As a result, any construction made on the land or its utilization for "non-forest purposes" without Central Government approval was violative of the Forest Act and therefore illegal. The relevant excerpt of this Court's decision, speaking through Justice Madan B. Lokur, is as follows:

Precedent : 63. An ancillary issue now remains for our consideration, which is whether the NGT could have adjudicated upon a violation of the TCP Act, which is not an Act present in Schedule I of the NGT Act. In a recent two-judge Bench decision of this Court in State of M.P. vs Centre for Environment Protection Research & Development (2020) 9 SCC 781., one of us speaking for the Court (Justice Indira Banerjee), held as follows:

