Precedent : 4. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the auction purchaser-appellant in Civil Appeal No. 1845 of 2010 has further submitted that the appeal itself before the High Court challenging the consent decree was not maintainable at all in view of the bar contained in Order XXIII Rule 3 and Section 96(3) CPC. In support of the above submission, he has heavily relied upon the decision of this Court in Pushpa Devi Bhagat v. Rajinder Singh (2006) 5 SCC 566.

Precedent : 4.1 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the auction purchaser that as such the auction purchaser purchased the property in the execution proceedings after he was declared the highest bidder. It is submitted that in the year 1999 itself the auction purchaser deposited the entire amount of sale consideration before the Executing Court and even a sale certificate was also issued in favour of the auction purchaser. It is further submitted that therefore in view of the Order XXI Rule 92 read with Rule 94 once the sale has become absolute and as held by this Court in the case of Chinnammal v. P. Arumugham(1990) 1 SCC 513, subsequent reversal of the decree shall not affect the auction purchaser who is not a party to the decree. It is submitted that as held by this Court in the aforesaid decision, the property bona fidely purchased ignorant of litigation should be protected. It is submitted that despite the fact that in the year 1999 the auction purchaser deposited the entire amount, because of the subsequent initiation of proceedings by the judgment debtors, the auction purchaser is not in a position to enjoy the property which the auction purchaser has purchased on payment of full sale consideration purchased in an auction in the execution proceedings.

Precedent : 12. Now, so far as the objection raised on behalf of the appellant herein that the appeal before the High Court against a consent decree was not maintainable is concerned, the same has no substance. The High Court has elaborately dealt with the same in detail and has considered the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, namely, Section 96, Order XXIII Rule 3, Order XLIII Rule 1 (m) and order XLIII Rule 1A(2). It is true that, as per Section 96(3), the appeal against the decree passed with the consent of the parties shall be barred. However, it is also true that as per Order XXIII Rule 3A no suit shall lie to set aside a decree on the ground that the compromise on which the decree is based was not lawful. However, it is required to be noted that when Order XLIII Rule 1(m) came to be omitted by Act 104 of 1976, simultaneously, Rule XLIII Rule 1A came to be inserted by the very Act 104 of 1976, which provides that in an appeal against the decree passed in a suit for recording a compromise or refusing to record a compromise, it shall be open to the appellant to contest the decree on the ground that the compromise should or should not have been recorded. Therefore, the High Court has rightly relied upon the decision of this Court in Banwari Lal v. Chando Devi AIR 1993 SC 1139 (para 9) and has rightly come to the conclusion that the appeal before the High Court against the judgment and decree passed in O.S. No. 3376 of 1995 was maintainable. No error has been committed by the High Court in holding so.

