Precedent : 9. According to the learned Solicitor General, first and foremost, the bar to interference by courts in electoral matters contained in Article 243ZG(a) gets attracted as the order dated 04.02.2021 relating to delimitation of constituencies and allotment of seats to such constituencies is a "law" for the purposes of 243ZG(a), attracting the constitutional bar which prohibits any court from entertaining a challenge to the aforesaid order's validity. For this purpose, he relied heavily on Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission, (1967) 1 SCR 400. Even otherwise, the concession made by the learned Advocate General in the High Court cannot bind a constitutional court which must give effect to a constitutional bar in electoral matters, and once the election schedule is notified, there is a complete judicial hands-off qua challenge to such election schedule which would have the effect, in any manner, of thwarting or postponing the aforesaid election schedule. For this purpose, he relied upon the constitutional bar contained in Article 243ZG(b), and relied on a plethora of case law namely, N.P. Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency, 1952 SCR 218, Durga Shankar Mehta v. Thakur Raghuraj Singh, (1955) 1 SCR 267, Hari Vishnu Kamath v. Syed Ahmad Ishaque, (1955) 1 SCR 1104, Narayan Bhaskar Khare (Dr) v. Election Commission of India, 1957 SCR 1081, Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commr., (1978) 1 SCC 405, Lakshmi Charan Sen v. A.K.M. Hassan Uzzaman, (1985) 4 SCC 689, Indrajit Barua v. Election Commission of India, (1985) 4 SCC 722, Anugrah Narain Singh v. State of U.P., (1996) 6 SCC 303, Election Commission of India v. Ashok Kumar, (2000) 8 SCC 216, Kishansing Tomar v. Municipal Corpn., Ahmedabad, (2006) 8 SCC 352, W.B. State Election Commission v. Communist Party of India (Marxist), (2018) 18 SCC 141, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam v. State of T.N., (2020) 6 SCC 548, Laxmibai v. Collector, (2020) 12 SCC 186. He also relied on judgments which in other contexts, such as cooperative societies for example, accepted what is laid down in Ponnuswamy's judgment even without any constitutional or statutory bar, stating that the only method of challenging an election is after the election process is over, by means of an election petition. For this purpose, he relied upon Section 22 of the Goa Municipalities Act which, according to him, contained grounds wide enough to set aside the entire election.

Precedent : 10. Shri Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant in civil appeal arising out of SLP (C) Diary No. 6385/2021, referred to the judgment in Lakshmi Charan Sen v. A.K.M. Hassan Uzzaman (supra) and in particular the passage about how a court ought not to interfere with an election at a stage in which the election process is "imminent" i.e., about to start. He then relied upon Election Commission of India v. Ashok Kumar (supra) for the proposition that even if there were certain faults after an election process is underway, these faults must be ignored as they can always be the subject matter of an election petition after the elections are complete. For this purpose, he also relied heavily upon Election Commission of India v. Shivaji, (1988) 1 SCC 277 and read from Chandrachud, J.'s judgment in W.B. State Election Commission v. Communist Party of India (Marxist) (supra) speaking of a judicial hands-off until the election process is over.

Precedent : 11. Shri P.S. Narasimha, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the SEC, relied upon the judgments in Kishansing Tomar v. Municipal Corpn., Ahmedabad (supra) and Anugrah Narain Singh v. State of U.P. (supra) and emphasized the fact that timely elections had to be held for which the SEC alone was in charge. He pointed out that a huge machinery had to be set up and was set up pursuant to the election notification that has been issued, all of which would be set at naught if the impugned judgment is not set aside. He further added that the observations made by the impugned judgment on the State Election Commission's indolence and non-action were not fair to the Commission and asked that they be deleted.

Precedent : 14. Shri Vivek Tankha, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the first Respondent in civil appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 4121/2021, emphasized that the SEC that is constituted under Article 243K is on par with the Election Commission of India. For this, he emphasized, in particular, the proviso in Article 243K(2) which makes it clear that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like manner and on the like ground as a Judge of a High Court, and the conditions of service of the State Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. This provision, according to the learned Senior Advocate, ensures that the SEC is an independent constitutional functionary which is to oversee elections conducted at Panchayat and Municipal levels. The whole problem in the present case has arisen only because this mandate of the Constitution has been flouted by the Government of Goa in that the Law Secretary has been given additional charge and made the State Election Commissioner, leading to the SEC not functioning as an independent body and, in fact, acting so as to pre-empt the jurisdiction of the High Court in challenging a notification issued by the Director under Section 10 of the Goa Municipalities Act. He reiterated the facts of this case as pointed out by Shri Nadkarni and relied, in addition, to Bendict Denis Kinny v. Tulip Brian Miranda & Ors., (2020) SCC Online 802 for the proposition that the High Court's doors are never closed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in deserving matters, in particular where the court's process is sought to be overreached by a non-functioning non-independent State Election Commission.

Precedent : 15. Shri Ninad Laud, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the intervenor in SLP (C) No. 3937/2021, cited the judgment in Anugrah Narain Singh v. State of U.P. (supra) and pointed out that under the Goa Municipalities Act, just as under the UP Act that was considered in that case, orders of delimitation, reservation and allotment of seats do not statutorily have the force of law, and can thus be challenged in a writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. He argued that this decision distinguishes Meghraj's case (supra) and would be applicable on the facts contained in the present case, as a result of which it was within the jurisdiction of the High Court to strike down the order of the Director reserving seats in wards dated 04.02.2021. He also made a reference to various provisions of the Goa Municipalities Act which specifically provide that when fractions are to be taken into account, they should be ignored. Such provision is conspicuous by its absence in Sections 9 and 10 of the Goa Municipalities Act, which is required to follow the constitutional mandate that is contained in Article 243T of the Constitution of India.

Precedent : 16. Having heard learned counsel for all parties, it is important to emphasize a few background facts before coming to the impugned judgment in the present case. In Dnyaneshwar Narso Naik v. State of Goa, WP No. 179/2020, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court at Goa, by its judgment dated 11.12.2020, (in the context of Zilla Panchayat elections in Goa) recorded as follows:

Precedent : 17. Likewise, a few days later, a Division Bench of the High Court, by an order dated 21.12.2020, in Sujay S. Lotlikar v. State of Goa, LD-VC-CW-359-2020, also specifically recorded:

Precedent : In Ashok Maniklal Harkut Vs Collector, Amravati and others [1988 Mh.L.J.378], the Full Bench of this Court, in the context of provisions of Section 55(1) and 55(2) of the Maharashtra Municipalities Act held that a valid no-confidence motion must be passed by not less than two-thirds of the total number of councilors was mandatory. The Full Bench held that the total number of votes must not be less than two-third though they may be more. The fraction cannot be ignored since if the fraction is ignored then the majority will be two-third of the councilors. Thus, where the total number of elected councilors at the time when the motion was moved 19, support of only 13 councilors, being less than two-third, was not sufficient to carry such a no-confidence motion.

Precedent : 32. The locus classicus on the subject is by an early judgment of this court which has been followed on innumerable occasions. N.P. Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency (supra), dealt with a petition that was filed under Article 226 before the Madras High Court praying for a writ of certiorari in the following circumstances:

Precedent : 38. What was left open in Ponnuswami's case as to the powers of this Court under Article 136 after an election tribunal had decided an election petition before it was decided by this Court in Durga Shankar Mehta v. Thakur Raghuraj Singh, (supra). This judgment described the reach of the non-obstante clause contained in Article 329(b) as follows:

Precedent : "As has been said already, the non obstante clause in Article 329 prohibits challenge to an election either to Parliament or any State Legislature, except in the manner laid down in clause (2) of the article. But there is no prohibition of the exercise of its powers by the Supreme Court in proper cases under Article 136 of the Constitution against the decision or determination of an Election Tribunal which like all other Judicial Tribunals comes within the purview of the article. It is certainly desirable that the decisions on matters of disputed election should, as soon as possible, become final and conclusive so that the constitution of the legislature may be distinctly and speedily known. But the powers under Article 136 are exercisable only under exceptional circumstances. The article does not create any general right of appeal from decisions of all tribunals. As regards the decision of this court in Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency [1952 SCR 218] to which reference has been made by the learned counsel, we would only desire to point out that all that this case decided was that the High Court had no jurisdiction, under Article 226 of the Constitution, to interfere by a writ of certiorari, with the order of a Returning Officer who was alleged to have wrongly rejected the nomination paper of a particular candidate. It was held that the word "election" in Article 329(b) of the Constitution had been used in the wide sense to connote the entire process, culminating in a candidate's being declared elected and that the scheme of Part XV of the Constitution was that all matters which had the effect of vitiating election should be brought up only after the election was over and by way of an election petition. The particular point, which arises for consideration here, was not decided in that case and was expressly left open."

Precedent : 39. Likewise, a discussion on the reach of Article 329(b) and Article 226 of the Constitution after an election petition has been decided by an election tribunal was then discussed in Hari Vishnu Kamath v. Syed Ahmad Ishaque, (supra):

Precedent : "Now, the question is whether a writ is a proceeding in which an election can properly be said to be called in question within the meaning of Article 329(b). On a plain reading of the article, what is prohibited therein is the initiation of proceedings for setting aside an election otherwise than by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as provided therein. A suit for setting aside an election would be barred under this provision. In N.P. Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency [1952 SCR 218] it was held by this court that the word "election" in Article 329(b) was used in a comprehensive sense as including the entire process of election commencing with the issue of a notification and terminating with the declaration of election of a candidate, and that an application under Article 226 challenging the validity of any of the acts forming part of that process would be barred. These are instances of original proceedings calling in question an election, and would be within the prohibition enacted in Article 329(b). But when once proceedings have been instituted in accordance with Article 329(b) by presentation of an election petition, the requirements of that article are fully satisfied. Thereafter when the election petition is in due course heard by a tribunal and decided, whether its decision is open to attack, and if so, where and to what extent, must be determined by the general law applicable to decisions of tribunals. There being no dispute that they are subject to the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226, a writ of certiorari under that article will be competent against decisions of the Election Tribunals also.

Precedent : 40. In Narayan Bhaskar Khare (Dr) v. Election Commission of India (supra), a 7-Judge Bench dealt with elections to the President and the Vice President of India contained under Article 71. The Court held:

Precedent : 41. The judgment of Krishna Iyer, J. contained in Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commr. (supra), is of great importance and delineates not only the parameters of Article 329(b) qua writ petitions filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India but also speaks of the powers of the Election Commission in supervising and conducting the entire election process. This Court made a distinction between challenges under Article 226 while the election process is on which interfere with the progress of the election as against approaching a writ court to accelerate the completion of the election and to act in furtherance of the election. The Court put it thus:

Precedent : "In the opinion of some of the Judges constituting the majority in Bharati's case [Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, (1973) 4 SCC 225.] rule of law is a basic structure of the Constitution apart from democracy.

Precedent : 44. In Boddula Krishnaiah and Another v. State Election Commissioner, A.P. & Ors., (1996) 3 SCC 416, a Gram Panchayat election notification had been issued, subsequent to which the High Court, by interim orders directed 94 persons to participate in the election. By subsequent interim orders, the claims of various respondents were to be ascertained, and ultimately, the Revenue Divisional Officer found 20 persons to be eligible to be included in the voters list, as a result of which the High Court directed that these persons should be allowed to participate in the election. This Court held:

Precedent : 45. In Election Commission of India v. Ashok Kumar (supra), a 3-Judge Bench of this Court reviewed the entire case law relating to Article 329(b) and Article 226 holding:

Precedent : 46. In Kurapati Maria Das v. Dr. Ambedkar Seva Samajan, (2009) 7 SCC 387, the validity of a caste certificate came up for determination in a writ petition that was filed which challenged municipal elections made to a reserved constituency. In this context, this court held:

Precedent : "18. Regarding the bar of jurisdiction under Article 243-ZG(b), learned counsel Shri Gagan Gupta submitted that the decision relied upon by the High Court as K. Venkatachalam v. A. Swamickan [(1999) 4 SCC 526] was applicable and, therefore, it could not be said that there was a bar to the entertainment of the writ petition under Article 226. Learned counsel supported the factual findings recorded by the High Court to the effect that the appellant was a Christian and, therefore, could not claim the status of a person belonging to the Scheduled Caste, more particularly, caste "Mala".

Precedent : 20. This Court in its recent decisions has held the bar to be absolute. First such decision is Jaspal Singh Arora v. State of M.P. [(1998) 9 SCC 594] In this case the election of the petitioner as the President of the Municipal Council was challenged by a writ petition under Article 226, which was allowed setting aside the election of the petitioner. In para 3 of this judgment, the Court observed:

Precedent : 21. The second such decision is Gurdeep Singh Dhillon v. Satpal [(2006) 10 SCC 616]. In that decision, after quoting Article 243-ZG(b) the Court observed that the shortcut of filing the writ petition and invoking constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court under Articles 226/227 was not permissible and the only remedy available to challenge the election was by raising the election dispute under the local statute.

Precedent : 47. In W.B. State Election Commission v. Communist Party of India (Marxist) (supra), the West Bengal State Commission issued certain directions extending the last date for submitting nominations by one day, after which the said order was recalled on the next day. A learned single Judge of the High Court delivered a judgment in which the order cancelling the extension was quashed and the commission was directed to issue a fresh notification extending the date for filing nomination. In obedience to this order, the SEC issued a notification extending the date for filing of nominations on 21.04.2018. Writ petitions were then filed which were dismissed by a learned Single Judge, who declined to interfere with the election process. Ultimately, after fresh writ petitions were moved before a single Judge of the Calcutta High Court, the single Judge declined to give any further directions, more particularly, that the SEC be made to accept nominations already filed in electronic forms. The Division Bench, while disposing of the appeal, directed the SEC to accept nominations in electronic forms by those candidates who had submitted them on or before 3.00 p.m. on 23.04.2018. After setting out the relevant provisions of the Panchayat Elections Act, this Court held:

Precedent : 29. There is merit in the submission that the discipline which is mandated by the provisions of the Constitution and enforced by the enabling State law on the subject must be maintained. Any dispute in regard to the validity of the election has to be espoused by adopting a remedy which is known to law, namely, through an election petition. It is at the trial of an election petition that factual disputes can be resolved on the basis of evidence. This principle has been consistently adhered to in decisions of this court. In Boddula Krishnaiah v. State Election Commr., A.P., (1996) 3 SCC 416, a three-Judge Bench adverted to the decisions of the Constitution Bench in N.P. Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency, 1952 SCR 218 in Lakshmi Charan Sen v. A.K.M. Hassan Uzzaman, (1985) 4 SCC 689. After referring to Ponnuswami, it was observed:

Precedent : "8. In N.P. Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency a Constitution Bench of this court had held that having regard to the important functions which the legislatures have to perform in democratic countries, it has always been recognised to be a matter of first importance that elections should be concluded as early as possible according to time-schedule and all controversial matters and all disputes arising out of elections should be postponed till after the elections are over so that the election proceedings may not be unduly retarded or protracted. In conformity with the principle, the scheme of the election law is that no significance should be attached to anything which does not affect the "election"; and if any irregularities are committed while it is in progress and they belong to the category or class which under the law by which elections are governed, would have the effect of vitiating the "election"; and enable the person affected to call it in question, they should be brought up before a Special Tribunal by means of an election petition and not be made the subject of a dispute before any court while the election is in progress."

Precedent : 48. A recent judgment of 3 learned Judges in Laxmibai v. Collector, (supra), comes nearer home when it deals with municipal elections, and holds as follows:

Precedent : "42. This court again examined the question in respect of raising a dispute relating to an election of a local body before the High Court by way of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in a judgment reported as Harnek Singh v. Charanjit Singh [Harnek Singh v. Charanjit Singh, (2005) 8 SCC 383]. It was held as under:

Precedent : "15. Prayers (b) and (c) aforementioned, evidently, could not have been granted [Charanjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 2003 SCC OnLine P&H 1226] in favour of the petitioner by the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. It is true that the High Court exercises a plenary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Such jurisdiction being discretionary in nature may not be exercised inter alia keeping in view the fact that an efficacious alternative remedy is available therefor. (See Sanjana M. Wig v. Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. (2005) 8 SCC 242)

Precedent : 17. In C. Subrahmanyam [C. Subrahmanyam v. K. Ramanjaneyullu, (1998) 8 SCC 703], a three-Judge Bench of this court observed that a writ petition should not be entertained when the main question which fell for decision before the High Court was non-compliance with the provisions of the Act which was one of the grounds for an election petition in terms of Rule 12 framed under the Act."

Precedent : 49. In Election Commission of India v. Shivaji, (supra), this court after referring to Ponnuswami's case then referred to the powers of the Election Commission under Article 324 as follows:

Precedent : "6. ............ If there was any such error committed in the course of the election process the Election Commission had the authority to set it right by virtue of power vested in it under Article 324 of the Constitution as decided in Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commissioner [(1978) 1 SCC 405] and to see that the election process was completed in a fair manner."

Precedent : 50. Similarly, in Digvijay Mote v. Union of India, (1993) 4 SCC 175, this court referred to the powers of the Election Commission under Article 324 of the Constitution as follows:

Precedent : 51. In Kishansing Tomar v. Municipal Corpn., Ahmedabad (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court clearly set out the powers of the State Election Commissions under the Constitution as follows:

Precedent : 24. The words, "superintendence, direction and control" as well as "conduct of elections" have been held in the "broadest of terms" by this court in several decisions including Special Reference No. 1 of 2002, In re [Special Reference No. 1 of 2002, In re, (2002) 8 SCC 237] and Mohinder Singh Gill case [Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commr., (1978) 1 SCC 405] and the question is whether this is equally relevant in respect of the powers of the State Election Commission as well.

Precedent : 53. So far as delimitation and allocation of seats is concerned, the bar contained in Article 243ZG(a) operates together with the non-obstante clause contained therein to bar all courts from interfering with State statutes dealing with delimitation and allocation of seats, just as is the bar contained in Article 329(a) of the Constitution. In Lakshmi Charan Sen v. A.K.M. Hassan Uzzaman (supra), Chandrachud, CJ. speaking for the majority of a Constitution Bench of this court, held that the delimitation process and the making of electoral rolls is independent of the process of any particular election and thus held:

Precedent : 54. This judgment was followed by another Constitution Bench in Indrajit Barua v. Election Commission of India (supra), the Court holding:

Precedent : 55. In Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission (supra), this court dealt with Sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962, and the bar contained in Article 329(a) as follows:

Precedent : 56. This judgment was followed in Assn. of Residents of Mhow (ROM) v. Delimitation Commission of India, (2009) 5 SCC 404, which dealt with Sections 9 and 10 of the Delimitation Act, 2002. The Court held:

Precedent : 36. In Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission [(1967) 1 SCR 400] a Constitution Bench of this court while interpreting Sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 which are in pari materia with the provisions of the present Act, observed:

Precedent : 57. In Rampakavi Rayappa Belagali v. B.D. Jatti, (1970) 3 SCC 147, the Court dealt with the scheme of the Representation of People Act, 1950 and its inter-relation with Article 329(a) as follows:

Precedent : 58. However, in State of U.P. v. Pradhan Sangh Kshettra Samiti, 1995 Supp (2) SCC 305, a division bench of this Court delineated the scope of interference so far as delimitation of Panchayat areas is concerned, as follows:

Precedent : 45. What is more objectionable in the approach of the High court is that although clause (a) of Article 243-O of the Constitution enacts a bar on the interference by the courts in electoral matters including the questioning of the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of the constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies made or purported to be made under Article 243-K and the election to any panchayat, the High Court has gone into the question of the validity of the delimitation of the constituencies and also the allotment of seats to them. We may, in this connection, refer to a decision of this court in Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission [(1967) 1 SCR 400]. In that case, a notification of the Delimitation Commission whereby a city which had been a general constituency was notified as reserved for the Scheduled Castes. This was challenged on the ground that the petitioner had a right to be a candidate for Parliament from the said constituency which had been taken away. This court held that the impugned notification was a law relating to the delimitation of the constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies made under Article 327 of the Constitution, and that an examination of Sections 8 and 9 of the Delimitation Commission Act showed that the matters therein dealt with were not subject to the scrutiny of any court of law. There was a very good reason for such a provision because if the orders made under Sections 8 and 9 were not to be treated as final, the result would be that any voter, if he so wished, could hold up an election indefinitely by questioning the delimitation of the constituencies from court to court. Although an order under Section 8 or Section 9 of the Delimitation Commission Act and published under Section 10(1) of that Act is not part of an Act of Parliament, its effect is the same. Section 10(4) of that Act puts such an order in the same position as a law made by Parliament itself which could only be made by it under Article 327. If we read Articles 243-C, 243-K and 243-O in place of Article 327 and Sections 2(kk), 11-F and 12-BB of the Act in place of Sections 8 and 9 of the Delimitation Act, 1950, it will be obvious that neither the delimitation of the panchayat area nor of the constituencies in the said areas and the allotments of seats to the constituencies could have been challenged nor the court could have entertained such challenge except on the ground that before the delimitation, no objections were invited and no hearing was given. Even this challenge could not have been entertained after the notification for holding the elections was issued. The High Court not only entertained the challenge but has also gone into the merits of the alleged grievances although the challenge was made after the notification for the election was issued on 31-8-1994."

Precedent : 59. The judgment in Anugrah Narain Singh v. State of U.P., (1996) 6 SCC 303 is instructive in that it deals with a local law namely the U.P. Nagar Maha Palika Adhiniyam, 1959, in the context of challenges made to orders under that Act. Meghraj's case was distinguished by this court as follows:

Precedent : 25. In this connection, it may be necessary to mention that there is one feature to be found in the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 which is absent in the U.P. Act. Section 10 of the Act of 1962 provided that the Commission shall cause each of its order made under Sections 8 and 9 to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes of the States concerned. Upon publication in the Gazette of India every such order shall have the force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. Because of these specific provisions of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962, in the case of Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission [AIR 1967 SC 669], this court held that notification of orders passed under Sections 8 and 9 of that Act had the force of law and therefore, could not be assailed in any court of law because of the bar imposed by Article 329. The U.P. Act of 1959, however, merely provides that the draft order of delimitation of municipal areas shall be published in the Official Gazette for objections for a period of not less than seven days. The draft order may be altered or modified after hearing the objections filed, if any. Thereupon, it shall become final. It does not lay down that such an order upon reaching finality will have the force of law and shall not be questioned in any court of law. For this reason, it may not be possible to say that such an order made under Section 32 of the U.P. Act has the force of law and is beyond challenge by virtue of Article 243-ZG. But any such challenge should be made soon after the final order is published..."

Precedent : 60. In Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam v. State of T.N. (supra), this Court dealt with certain interlocutory applications that were filed seeking directions for compliance with the constitutional mandate concerning elections to local bodies. This Court dealt with contentions raised by the parties before it as follows:

Precedent : 13. Noticing how at the completion of the delimitation process there were only 31 revenue districts, but despite a subsequent increase in number of districts to 39, no fresh delimitation exercise has been undertaken, it is clear that the State Government cannot fulfil the aforestated constitutional mandate. There is no identified data elucidating population proportions and, hence, requisite reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes cannot be provided for, both in re village panchayat wards or Chairman/Vice-Chairman of District bodies. We, hence, have no doubt that the election process as notified by the State Election Commission on 2-12-2019, in respect of the newly constituted nine districts cannot be held unless fresh delimitation exercise in respect thereto is first completed. The State Government cannot justify holding local body elections of these nine districts by relying upon this Court's order dated 18-11-2019 [C.R. Jayasukin v. T.N. State Election Commission, 2019 SCC OnLine SC 1664] as the said order itself mandates notification of elections only after completing "all legal formalities".

Precedent : 14. The contention of the respondents that the present proceedings amount to "calling in question an election" and hence not being maintainable in view of the express constitutional embargos of Articles 243-O and 243-ZG does not impress us for the present proceedings are only to further the expeditious completion of prerequisites of a fair election. Hence, the following ratio of a coordinate Bench in Election Commission of India v. Ashok Kumar, (2000) 8 SCC 216 squarely applies to the present case:

Precedent : 64. Applying the law to the facts of the present case, the first important thing to be noted is that the constitutional bar contained in Article 243ZG(a) does not apply to the facts of this case. As has correctly been pointed out by Shri Laud, the judgment in Anugrah Narain Singh v. State of U.P. (supra) would apply as the Goa Municipalities Act does not contain any provision akin to Section 10(2) or 10(4) of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 that was highlighted in Meghraj's case (supra), providing that orders of the Delimitation Commission have the force of law. This being the case, the first and foremost roadblock that has been put forward by the learned Solicitor General has been cleared. No fault can be found with the Division Bench of the High Court in ignoring any constitutional bar in arriving at the conclusion that the 04.02.2021 order is illegal and ultra vires the provisions of Article 243T of the Constitution of India read with Sections 9 and 10 of the Goa Municipalities Act. On merits, it is important to note that Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General, did not advance any argument that the reservation of seats for women and OBCs was in accord with the provisions of the Constitution and the Goa Municipalities Act. Indeed, even otherwise, we do not find fault with the Division Bench judgment in its conclusion that a fraction has to be worked upwards whatever that fraction be, given the mandatory language of Article 243T of the Constitution which provides for reservation for women which shall not be less than one-third. Also, the findings of the High Court on OBC reservation not complying with the mandate of Section 9(2)(bb) in that in several councils it was below 27% cannot be faulted. The same goes for observations made on the 1 ST seat in Sanguem and non-application of the principle of rotation.

Precedent : (vii) In a clear attempt to overreach the High Court, the State Election Commissioner, who is none other than the Law Secretary of the State of Goa, issues an election notification at 9:00 a.m. on 22.02.2021, even before the Government offices open at 9:30 a.m. in order to forestall the hearing of the writ petitions filed before the High Court, which commences hearing the writ petitions at 9.00 a.m. It is well settled that actions of the State with oblique or indirect object will be attributed to "malice in law". This Court in Kalabharati Advertising v. Hemant Vimalnath Narichania & Ors (2010) 9 SCC 437 has summarised this as follows:

Precedent : "25. The State is under obligation to act fairly without ill will or malice-in fact or in law. "Legal malice" or "malice in law" means something done without lawful excuse. It is an act done wrongfully and wilfully without reasonable or probable cause, and not necessarily an act done from ill feeling and spite. It is a deliberate act in disregard to the rights of others. Where malice is attributed to the State, it can never be a case of personal ill will or spite on the part of the State. It is an act which is taken with an oblique or indirect object. It means exercise of statutory power for "purposes foreign to those for which it is in law intended". It means conscious violation of the law to the prejudice of another, a depraved inclination on the part of the authority to disregard the rights of others, which intent is manifested by its injurious acts. (Vide ADM, Jabalpur v. Shivakant Shukla [(1976) 2 SCC 521], S.R. Venkataraman v. Union of India [(1979) 2 SCC 491], State of A.P. v. Goverdhanlal Pitti [(2003) 4 SCC 739], BPL Ltd. v. S.P. Gururaja [(2003) 8 SCC 567] and W.B. SEB v. Dilip Kumar Ray [(2007) 14 SCC 568])".

