Precedent : 8. On 21 May 2011, APIIC was informed that a 'political force majeure event' within the meaning of the Development Agreement had taken place. On 19 December 2011, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in a proceeding titled as "Pratap Karan v Govt. of Andhra Pradesh Appeal Suit No. 274 of 2007 (Andhra Pradesh High Court), held that the Government of Andhra Pradesh did not have title to the project land. Following the decision, Unitech by its communication dated 27 March 2012 requested APIIC to clarify the position and to jointly explore possible solutions to the title dispute over the project site.

Precedent : 11. On 9 October 2015, a two-judge bench of this Court in its decision in State of Andhra Pradesh through Principal Secretary v. Pratap Karan (2016) 2 SCC 82 upheld the judgment of the High Court. After the decision of this Court, Unitech requested APIIC and TSIIC, on 14 October 2015, to refund all the amounts which have been received in relation to the land together with interest and damages for the loss suffered by them, which included the cost of borrowing capital from banks, expenses for planning and designing, opportunity costs and other costs for development.

Precedent : 33. A two judge Bench of this Court in ABL International Ltd. v. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India (2004) 3 SCC 553 [ABL International] analyzed a long line of precedent of this Court K.N. Guruswamy v. State of Mysore, AIR 1954 SC 592; Gujarat State Financial Corporation. v. Lotus Hotels (P) Ltd, (1983) 3 SCC 379; Gunwant Kaur v. Municipal Committee, Bhatinda, (1969) 3 SCC 769 to conclude that writs under Article 226 are maintainable for asserting contractual rights against the state, or its instrumentalities, as defined under Article 12 of the Indian Constitution. Speaking through Justice N Santosh Hegde, the Court held:

Precedent : This exposition has been followed by this Court, and has been adopted by three-judge Bench decisions of this Court in State of UP v. Sudhir Kumar 2020 Scconline SC 847 and Popatrao Vynkatrao Patil v. State of Maharashtra Civil Appeal 1600 of 2000 (Supreme Court of India). The decision in ABL International, cautions that the plenary power under Article 226 must be used with circumspection when other remedies have been provided by the contract. But as a statement of principle, the jurisdiction under Article 226 is not excluded in contractual matters. Article 23.1 of the Development Agreement in the present case mandates the parties to resolve their disputes through an arbitration. However, the presence of an arbitration clause within a contract between a state instrumentality and a private party has not acted as an absolute bar to availing remedies under Article 226. Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., (2003) 2 SCC 107; Ram Barai Singh & Co. v. State of Bihar & Ors., (2015) 13 SCC 592. If the state instrumentality violates its constitutional mandate under Article 14 to act fairly and reasonably, relief under the plenary powers of the Article 226 of the Constitution would lie. This principle was recognized in ABL International:

Precedent : "28. However, while entertaining an objection as to the maintainability of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the court should bear in mind the fact that the power to issue prerogative writs under Article 226 of the Constitution is plenary in nature and is not limited by any other provisions of the Constitution. The High Court having regard to the facts of the case, has a discretion to entertain or not to entertain a writ petition. The Court has imposed upon itself certain restrictions in the exercise of this power. (See Whirlpool Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade Marks [(1998) 8 SCC 1].) And this plenary right of the High Court to issue a prerogative writ will not normally be exercised by the Court to the exclusion of other available remedies unless such action of the State or its instrumentality is arbitrary and unreasonable so as to violate the constitutional mandate of Article 14 or for other valid and legitimate reasons, for which the Court thinks it necessary to exercise the said jurisdiction."

Precedent : 37. The failure of title in the erstwhile APIIC and the Government of Andhra Pradesh attained finality upon the decision of this Court in State of Andhra Pradesh Through Principal Secretary v. Pratap Karan (2016) 2 SCC 82. The basic postulate on which the entire contract was founded stood nullified as a consequence of the failure of title. The agreement clearly provides that the ability of the Government of Andhra Pradesh/TSIIC to convey full title to the developer forms the basis of the contract. The failure of title entitles Unitech to claim a full refund together with compensatory payment, as contractually defined. The claim does not raise a disputed question of fact requiring an evidentiary determination. Both the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court have elaborately considered the precedents of this Court and correctly concluded that Unitech is entitled to a refund. The finding in regard to the entitlement of Unitech to a refund is unexceptionable and has correctly not been called into question at the stage of the hearing, despite the grounds which were raised in the pleadings in the proceedings initiated under Article 136 of the Constitution by TSIIC and the State of Telangana. APIIC, as an instrumentality of the erstwhile Government of Andhra Pradesh, invited bids for a public project. Having invited private entrepreneurs to submit bids on stipulated terms and conditions, it must be held down to make good its representations. The State and its instrumentalities are duty bound to act fairly under Article 14 of the Constitution. They cannot, even in the domain of contract, claim an exemption from the public law duty to act fairly. Indsil Hydropower v. State of Kerala, Civil Appeal Nos. 5943-5945 of 2019 (Supreme Court of India), para 33; ABL International Ltd. v. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India, (2004) 3 SCC 553, para 23; Central Bank of India v. Devi Ispat Ltd., (2010) 11 SCC 186, para 28. The State and its instrumentalities do not shed either their character or their obligation to act fairly in their dealings with private parties in the realm of contract. Investors who respond to the representations held out by the State while investing in public projects are legitimately entitled to assert that the representations must be fulfilled and to enforce compliance with duties which have been contractually assumed.

Precedent : The above circumstances have no bearing on whether Unitech is entitled to a refund of moneys from the date of initial payment. The entitlement of Unitech to a refund of the amounts paid is embodied in the terms of the contract which envisage that a default on the part of APIIC in conveying the land or the existence of political force majeure events would furnish a valid basis for the "compensatory payment". Moreover, the date from which compensatory payment has to be made is specifically provided : the Development Agreement provides that it will be "from the date on which the first payment of project price" is made. The Division Bench was in error in curtailing the right of Unitech to claim a refund with effect from the dates on which the respective payments were made. Obviously, Unitech had entered into the project since it wished to pursue it. Unitech cannot be penalized for wanting to continue with the agreement, as APIIC navigated disputes over its claim to the land. While Unitech was put to notice of the existence of a litigation, the Development Agreement which stipulated an encumbrance-free handover also specified that its covenants would supersede all other understandings and that its terms would rank as the first, in order of interpretive priority. The judgment of the Division Bench suffers from a clear and patent error in restricting the liability of paying interest with effect from 14 October 2015. The liability must date back, in terms of the Development Agreement, from the date on which the respective payments were made by Unitech. Interest at the contractual SBI-PLR rate has to be paid to Unitech. However, considering the facts and circumstances of this case, the conscionability of Article 14.3.1 read with Article 1(h) of the Development Agreement stipulating compensatory payment at the SBI-PLR, compounded annually, becomes suspect. Clause 17 of the LoA expressly mentioned that the title of the land is lis pendens and subject to the outcome of the proceedings pending before the Andhra Pradesh High Court. Unitech considered this circumstance and consciously entered into the Development Agreement. It continued to liaise with APIIC after an unfavorable judgement of the Andhra Pradesh High Court and did not issue a termination notice, until the title was conclusively denied by a judgement of this Court. A Constitution Bench of this Court, in the case of Central Bank of India v. Ravindra (2002) 1 SCC 367, when considering the question of penal interest rates, had observed:

Precedent : In a similar vein, in interpreting Section 74 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, this Court has held that a contractually-stipulated interest rate, if found to be penal, excessive or in terrorem can be reduced to a reasonable rate of compensation. Oriental Kuries Ltd. v. Lissa, (2019) 19 SCC 732; Bhubaneshwar Development Authority v. Susanta Kumar Mishra, (2009) 4 SCC 684. In upholding the reasoning of the Kerala High Court in full, a two judge Bench of this Court in K P Subbarama Sastri v. KS Raghavan (1987) 2 SCC 424 held:

Precedent : 44. TSIIC and the State of Telangana have brought to our notice that the Development Agreement, on the basis of which Unitech has sought to avail its contractual remedy has not been registered or assessed to stamp duty. Under Article 3.1 of the Development Agreement, the obligation of paying registration fees and stamp duty is on Unitech. It is well-settled law that the Stamp Act is a fiscal measure enacted to secure the revenue for the State, and not to arm the opponent with a weapon of technicality. Hindustan Steel Limited v. Dilip Construction Company, (1969) 1 SCC 597 para 7. Unitech's claim to compensatory payment cannot be defeated on the sole ground of the payment of stamp duty. The Development Agreement shall have to be impounded and be presented to the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority in the State of Telangana for assessment of stamp duty and to the competent authority for registration. The assessment shall be completed within thirty days. The appropriate stamp duty and registration charges liable to be paid in terms of the determination shall be paid by TSIIC and be deducted from the refund due and payable to Unitech under the terms of this order.

