Precedent : 2. Pursuant to the judgement of this Court in P.A. Inamdar & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. (2005) 6 SCC 537, the State of Kerala enacted Kerala Professional Colleges or Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee, Regulation of Admission, Fixation of Non-Exploitative Fee and Other Measures to Ensure Equity and Excellence in Professional Education) Act, 2006. The Rules framed under the said Act came into force w.e.f. 2006. The said Act was replaced by Kerala Medical Education (Regulation and Control of Admission to Private Medical Educational Institutions) Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to as "the 2017 Act"). Certain provisions of the 2017 Act were challenged by way of Writ Petitions filed in the High Court of Kerala. The fixation of admission fee for all the medical colleges in the State of Kerala provisionally at Rs. 5 Lakh by the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee was also subject matter of challenge in the said Writ Petitions. Section 8 of the 2017 Act delineates the powers and functions of the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee (hereinafter referred to as "the Committee") constituted under Section 3 of the 2017 Act. Section 8(1)(a) provides that the Committee can direct a private aided or unaided medical institution to furnish the required information along with necessary material for enabling the Committee to determine the fee that may be charged by the institution in respect of each medical course. Section 11 of the 2017 Act mentions the factors that are to be taken into account by the Committee for determination of the fee to be charged by a private aided or unaided medical institution. The challenge to Sections 8(1)(a) and Section 11 of the 2017 Act was rejected by the High Court in its judgment dated 02.11.2017. However, the High Court held that fixation of fee provisionally was ultra vires the 2017 Act. After examining the law laid down by this Court in T.M.A. Pai Foundation & Ors. v. State of Karnataka & Ors. (2002) 8 SCC 481, Islamic Academy of Education v. State of Karnataka & Ors. (2003) 6 SCC 697, P.A. Inamdar (supra) and Modern Dental College & Research Centre & Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. (2016) 7 SCC 353 with respect to fixation of fee for professional courses in unaided medical colleges, the High Court of Kerala held that the institutions shall propose the fee structure and the scrutiny by the Committee shall only be for the purpose of ensuring that such fee is not exploitative and that the institutions are not indulging in profiteering or collecting capitation fee. According to the High Court, the Committee can formulate a policy of directing the colleges to submit audited accounts of previous years for the purpose of ascertaining that there is no profiteering by the institutions in fixing the fee. The High Court made it clear that the Committee cannot go into the desirability or appropriateness of the expenses incurred by the institution as per its own notions and standards. While disposing of the Writ Petitions, the High Court fixed a time schedule for finalizing the fee to be paid by students as it would be detrimental to the interests of both students and the institutions to keep the finalization of fee pending for a long time.

