Precedent Relied : 43. Under Section 5(7) of the IBC, a person can be categorised as a financial creditor if a financial debt is owed to it. Section 5(8) of the IBC stipulates that the essential ingredient of a financial debt is disbursal against consideration for the time value of money. This Court, speaking through Justice Rohinton F Nariman, in Swiss Ribbons Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India (2019) 4 SCC 17 has held:

Precedent Relied : 44. In this context, it would be relevant to discuss the meaning of the terms "disburse" and "time value of money" used in the principal clause of Section 5(8) of the IBC. This Court has interpreted the term "disbursal" in Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Ltd vs. Union of India (2019) 8 SCC 416 in the following terms:

Precedent Relied : 46. The above discussion shows that money advanced as debt should be in the receipt of the borrower. The borrower is obligated to return the money or its equivalent along with the consideration for a time value of money, which is the compensation or price payable for the period of time for which the money is lent. A transaction which is sham or collusive would only create an illusion that money has been disbursed to a borrower with the object of receiving consideration in the form of time value of money, when in fact the parties have entered into the transaction with a different or an ulterior motive. In other words, the real agreement between the parties is something other than advancing a financial debt. A useful elaboration of "sham transactions" can be found in the opinion of Diplock LJ in Snook vs. London and West Riding Investments Ltd. [1967] 2 QB 786 :

Precedent Relied : "But one thing, I think, is clear in legal principle, morality and the authorities (see Yorkshire Railway Wagon Co v Maclure and Stoneleigh Finance Ltd. v Phillips), that for acts or documents to be a "sham," with whatever legal consequences follow from this, all the parties thereto must have a common intention that the acts or documents are not to create the legal rights and obligations which they give the appearance of creating. No unexpressed intentions of a "shammer" affect the rights of a party whom he deceived..."

Precedent Relied : 47. This Court, in Prem Chand Tandon vs. Krishna Chand Kapoor, (1973) 2 SCC 366 had to determine whether a usufructuary mortgage was a sham transaction entered into by the respondent there (the borrower) to avoid payment to creditors. This Court examined the real nature of the transaction to hold that the parties entered the transaction with an ulterior motive. Justice A.N. Grover, speaking for this Court, held:

Precedent Referred : (ii) The Appellate Tribunal has incorrectly held that Mr Arun Anand was in a position to influence the decision making of the Corporate Debtor, without satisfying the test of "control" established in Arcelor Mittal India (P) Ltd. vs Satish Kumar Gupta (2019) 2 SCC 1;

Precedent Relied : 62. Based on the above, it is not difficult for us to accept the conclusion of the NCLAT that Mr Arun Anand would be a related party of the Corporate Debtor in accordance with Section 5(24)(h) and Sections 5(24)(m)(i). Mr Viswanathan has tried to refute this argument by relying on the definition of 'control' in Arcelor Mittal India (P) Ltd. vs Satish Kumar Gupta (supra). However, it is important to note that the discussion there was in the context of ineligible resolution applicants under Sub-section (c) of Section 29-A of the IBC, which specifically prescribes this test. Presently, we have to determine whether the Corporate Debtor's board, directors, etc, are accustomed to act on Mr Arun Anand's advice/direction/instruction and if he participates in the policy-making process of the Corporate Debtor. While a strict determination of intent or mens rea may not always be possible by the NCLT and NCLAT in summary proceedings, it is possible to draw the inference from the facts at hand. These facts are that there was a deep entanglement between the entities of Mr Arun Anand and Mr Anil Nanda, and Mr Arun Anand did hold positions during this period which could have been used by him to guide the affairs of the Corporate Debtor. This finding is further supported by our conclusion that the transactions between the Corporate Debtor and the entities led by Mr Arun Anand were collusive in nature.

Precedent Relied : 83. In Arcelor Mittal India Private Limited vs. Satish Kumar Gupta (supra), the issue was whether ineligibility of the resolution applicant under Section 29-A(c) of the Code attached to an applicant at the date of commencement of the CIRP or at the time when the resolution plan is submitted by the resolution applicant. Speaking for this Court, Justice Rohinton F Nariman interpreted the pre-2018 amendment, framing of Section 29-A(c), in the following terms:

Precedent Referred : 86. In this context, it would be useful to refer to an earlier decision of this Court in Abhay Singh Chautala vs C.B.I. (2011) 7 SCC 141, where the court did not interpret the word "is" in praesenti because that would lead to an absurd result, defeating the purpose of the concerned provision. In that case this Court had to interpret Section 19(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, which provided:

Precedent Referred : "44...we reject the argument based on the word "is" in Sub-sections (a), (b) and (c). It is true that the Section operates in praesenti; however, the Section contemplates a person who continues to be a public servant on the date of taking cognizance. However, as per the interpretation, it excludes a person who has abused some other office than the one which he is holding on the date of taking cognizance, by necessary implication. Once that is clear, the necessity of the literal interpretation would not be there in the present case. Therefore, while we agree with the principles laid down in Robert Wigram Crawford v. Richard Spooner 4 MIA 179, Re Bedia v. Genreal Accident, Fir and Life Assurance Corporation Ltd. 1948 (2) All ER 995 and Bourne (Inspector of Taxes) v. Norwich Crematorium Ltd.1967 (2) All ER 576, we specifically hold that giving the literal interpretation to the Section would lead to absurdity and some unwanted results, as had already been pointed out in Antulay's case (cited supra) (see the emphasis supplied to para 24 of Antulay's judgment)."

Precedent Referred : 88. This Court relied on the judgement in R S Nayak v. A R Antulay to fortify its interpretation of Section 19(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947:

Precedent Relied : 89. This court has approved of a purposive interpretation of Section 29-A of the IBC in Arcelor Mittal India Private Limited v. Satish Kumar Gupta (supra), where it was observed that:

Precedent Relied : "29...In Ms. Eera Through Dr. Manjula Krippendorf v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) and Anr., (2017) 15 SCC 133, this Court, after referring to the golden Rule of literal construction, and its older counterpart the "object rule" in Heydon's case, referred to the theory of creative interpretation as follows:

Precedent Relied : 122. Instances of creative interpretation are when the Court looks at both the literal language as well as the purpose or object of the statute in order to better determine what the words used by the draftsman of legislation mean. In D.R. Venkatachalam v. Transport Commr. [D.R. Venkatachalam v. Transport Commr., (1977) 2 SCC 273, an early instance of this is found in the concurring judgment of Beg, J. The learned Judge put it rather well when he said: (SCC p. 287, para 28):

