Precedent Relied : 2. All these appeals pertain to an exemption provision contained in the Kerala Building Tax Act, 1975. Under Section 3(1)(b) buildings that are used principally for religious, charitable or educational purposes or as factories or workshops are exempted from building tax under the Act. All of the appeals, except one, are by the State of Kerala against a judgment dated 22.11.2007 passed by a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court in Government of Kerala & Anr v. Mother Superior Adoration Convent (Civil Appeal No.202 of 2012) and a Full Bench judgment in State of Kerala & Ors v. Unity Hospital (P) Ltd. (Civil Appeal No. 207 of 2012), being a judgment dated 21.12.2010. Both judgments decided to exempt the buildings in question. The other appeals by the State contain judgments which follow either or both of these judgments. The only appeal by an assessee namely, Administrator, Jos Giri Hospital v. Government of Kerala (Civil Appeal No.204 of 2012), is from a judgment of the Division Bench of the Kerala High Court deciding the case in favour of the State. However, this judgment was referred to the Full Bench which decided the judgment in State of Kerala & Ors v. Unity Hospital (P) Ltd. (Civil Appeal No. 207 of 2012) and has been stated to have reached an incorrect conclusion.

Precedent Referred : 7. The Full Bench judgment of 2010 contained in Civil Appeal No.207 of 2012 was as a result of a Division Bench doubting the correctness of the Division Bench judgment in Administrator, Jos Giri Hospital v. Government of Kerala that is contained in Civil Appeal No.204 of 2012. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Full Bench posed the question raised thus:

Precedent Relied : 7. The next question to be considered is whether hostel facility to students provided by other educational institutions, which are not compulsorily required under the educational regulations to provide accommodation to students, is an educational purpose qualifying the hostel buildings for tax exemption. In this context, we have to necessarily consider the object and scope of the exemption clause provided in the statute. While learned counsel for the appellants have relied on Section 235 of the Kerala Municipalities Act, which provides for exemption to buildings used for educational purposes including hostel buildings owned by the same educational institutions, learned Government Pleader has relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Children Book Trust, reported in AIR 1992 SC 1456, where the Supreme Court held that school buildings are not entitled to exemption from municipal tax under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act. On going through the judgment of the Supreme Court, we notice that the provision for exemption from property tax under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act is not similar to the provisions of the Kerala Building Tax Act, and so much so, in our view, the decision cannot be applied while deciding the claim of exemption made by the appellants in these cases. Even though Section 235 of the Kerala Municipalities Act specifically provides for property tax exemption for hostel buildings owned by the very same educational institutions, there is no specific exemption for hostel buildings in Section 3 (1)(b) of the Kerala Building Tax Act. Therefore, we have to examine whether "educational purposes" referred to in Section 3(1)(b) has only restricted meaning or it has a wider meaning covering all buildings directly or indirectly catering to the needs of student community. In this context, we have to necessarily consider the general pattern of hostel facility provided by education institutions in the State. In the recent past, large number of educational institutions, particularly engineering colleges are established all over Kerala including remote areas and hill stations, where the students admitted are not from local area and they have to necessarily depend on hostel facility to be provided by the educational institution. In fact admissions to medical and engineering colleges are given on central allotment basis and hardly any student can get admission in a college near to his/her house. Therefore, necessarily, the students have to depend on hostel accommodation to pursue their studies. Colleges will not get students if they do not provide hostel accommodation to students near to the College. Therefore, hostel buildings are constructed by educational institutions to attract students to their institutions. Many educational institutions provide only basic facilities like building, electricity and water connections for hostels and in fact, students are running mess on sharing basis. So much so, the State's contention that hostels attached to educational institutions are commercial ventures intended to make profit, in our view, is unacceptable. In order to consider whether hostel provided by an educational institution is for educational purpose or not, we have to consider the consequences if such educational institution does not have hostel facility to provide accommodation to its students. Obviously, such educational institutions have to source students locally, which may be possible only in the case of Schools. In fact, thousands of schools and colleges in the State do not have hostel facility because they depend on students from the local area only. However, wherever an educational institution has students from different parts of the State, and Non Resident Indians sending their children for studies in Kerala, necessarily the educational institution has to provide hostel facility to the students. In fact, without hostel facility, many educational institutions will not have required number of students to run it. We, therefore, feel accommodation is a necessary facility, which an educational institution is required to provide to it's students; and so long as the purpose of stay of students in the hostel is to study in the educational institution, the purpose of such building, which is used for accommodation of students, qualifies as educational purpose.

Precedent Referred : 14. In Union of India v. Wood Papers Ltd (1990) 4 SCC 256 the rule as to exemption notifications in tax statutes was felicitously laid down as follows:

Precedent Relied : 15. This statement of the law was followed in a number of judgments. Suffice it to say that in Star Industries v. Commr. of Customs (Imports) (2016) 2 SCC 362, a large number of judgments are referred to for the same proposition (see paragraphs 32 to 34).

Precedent Relied : 16. However, there is another line of authority which states that even in tax statutes, an exemption provision should be liberally construed in accordance with the object sought to be achieved if such provision is to grant incentive for promoting economic growth or otherwise has some beneficial reason behind it. In such cases, the rationale of the judgments following Wood Papers (supra) does not apply. In fact, the legislative intent is not to burden the subject with tax so that some specific public interest is furthered. Thus, in CST v. Industrial Coal Enterprises (1999) 2 SCC 607, this Court held:

Precedent Relied : "11. In CIT v. Straw Board Mfg. Co. Ltd. 1989 Supp (2) SCC 523 this Court held that in taxing statutes, provision for concessional rate of tax should be liberally construed. So also in Bajaj Tempo Ltd. v. CIT (1992) 3 SCC 78 it was held that provision granting incentive for promoting economic growth and development in taxing statutes should be liberally construed and restriction placed on it by way of exception should be construed in a reasonable and purposive manner so as to advance the objective of the provision.

Precedent Referred : 17. Likewise, in State of Jharkhand v. Tata Cummins Ltd (2006) 4 SCC 57 in dealing with a tax exemption for setting up an industry in a backward area, this Court held as follows:

Precedent Referred : 18. Similarly, in Pondicherry State Coop. Consumer Federation Ltd. v. Union Territory of Pondicherry (2008) 1 SCC 206 this Court held:

Precedent Referred : "5. Learned Senior Counsel Shri Venkatraman appearing for the appellant assessee submitted that this question was no more res integra and was covered by the judgment of this Court in Vadilal Chemicals Ltd. v. State of A.P. (2005) 6 SCC 292. It was pointed out that in that case an identical question fell for consideration under the similar circumstances. There also, the question was as to whether the small-scale industry which was engaged in bottling of anhydrous ammonia could be said to be entitled to the exemption from payment of sales tax on the ground that it was manufacturing such goods since there was a general exemption offered by the Andhra Pradesh Government by GOMs No. 117 dated 17-3-1993 to the small-scale industry. There also it was found on inspection that the assessee industry was allowed irregular tax exemption on the first sales of anhydrous liquefied ammonia as it was found that the commodity that was purchased and sold was one of the same and there was no new commodity that had emerged and that the assessee had only done bottling of ammonia. The show-cause notices were issued to the assessee in that case suggesting therein that the activity of bottling/packing of gases into unit containers from bulk quantities was not recognised as "manufacture" even under the Central Excise Act. In that view the question which fell for consideration before this Court was as to whether under the circumstances the assessee could claim the exemption. This Court firstly held that the exemption certificate was granted by the authorities after due consideration. It was then noted that though the exemption was available on the products "manufactured" in industrial units, the interpretation put forth by the authorities on the word "manufacture" was incorrect. This Court took the view that the authorities had based the interpretation of word "manufacture" on the law relating to excise and that it was erroneous to do so. It was observed that in the State Sales Tax Act there was no provision relating to "manufacture" and the concept was to be found only in the 1993 G.O. which had provided the exemption. The Court further took the view that the exemption was granted with a view to give a fillip to the industry in the State and also for the industrial units of the State. The Court, therefore, took the view that a liberal interpretation of the term "manufacture" should have been adopted by the State authorities, more particularly, when the State authorities had granted the certificate of eligibility after due consideration of the facts.

Precedent Relied : "20. In this case the State Sales Tax Act contains no provision relating to 'manufacture'. The concept only finds place in the 1993 G.O. issued by the Department of Commerce and Industries. It appears from the context of the other provisions of the 1993 G.O. that the word 'manufacture' had been used to exclude dealers who merely purchased the goods and resold the same on retail price. What the State Government wanted was investment and industrial activity. It is in this background that the 1993 G.O. must be interpreted. (See CST v. Industrial Coal Enterprises (1999) 2 SCC 607). The exemption was granted in terms of the 1993 G.O. the thrust of which was to increase industrial development in the State."

Precedent Referred : 19. While construing an exemption in a sales tax statute, this Court in CST v. Amara Raja Batteries Ltd (2009) 8 SCC 209 held:

Precedent Relied : "21. An exemption notification should be given a literary (sic literal) meaning. Recourse to other principles or canons of interpretation of statute should be resorted to only in the event the same give rise to anomaly or absurdity. The exemption notification must be construed having regard to the purpose and object it seeks to achieve. The Government sought for increase in industrial development in the State. Such a benevolent act on the part of the State, unless there exists any statutory interdict, should be given full effect. (See Vadilal Chemicals Ltd. v. State of A.P. (2005) 6 SCC 292)"

Precedent Relied : 20. Likewise, even under the Customs Act, this Court in Commr. of Customs (Preventive) v. M. Ambalal & Co. (2011) 2 SCC 74 made a clear distinction between exemptions which are to be strictly interpreted as opposed to beneficial exemptions having as their purpose - encouragement or promotion of certain activities. This case felicitously put the law thus follows:

Precedent Referred : 21. This judgment was followed in CCE v. Favourite Industries (2012) 7 SCC 153 (see paragraph 42).

Precedent Relied : 22. A recent 5-Judge Bench judgment was cited by Shri Gupta in Commr. of Customs v. Dilip Kumar & Co. (2018) 9 SCC 1. The 5-Judge Bench was set up as a 3-Judge Bench in Sun Export Corporation v. Collector of Customs 1997 (6) SCC 564 was doubted, as the said judgment ruled that an ambiguity in a tax exemption provision must be interpreted so as to favour the assessee claiming the benefit of such exemption. This Court after dealing with a number of judgments relating to exemption provisions in tax statutes, ultimately concluded as follows:

Precedent Overruled : 66.3. The ratio in Sun Export case [Sun Export Corpn. v. Collector of Customs, (1997) 6 SCC 564] is not correct and all the decisions which took similar view as in Sun Export case stand overruled."

Precedent Relied : 23. It may be noticed that the 5-Judge Bench judgment did not refer to the line of authority which made a distinction between exemption provisions generally and exemption provisions which have a beneficial purpose. We cannot agree with Shri Gupta's contention that sub-silentio the line of judgments qua beneficial exemptions has been done away with by this 5-Judge Bench. It is well settled that a decision is only an authority for what it decides and not what may logically follow from it (see Quinn v. Leathem [1901] AC 495 as followed in State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Sekhar Misra (1968) 2 SCR 154 at 162,163)

Precedent Relied : 25. The matter can also be seen from a slightly different angle. Where a High Court construes a local statute, ordinarily deference must be given to the High Court judgments in interpreting such a statute, particularly when they have stood the test of time (see State of Gujarat v. Zinabhai Ranchhodji Darji (1972) 1 SCC 233 at paragraph 10, Bishamber Dass Kohli v. Satya Bhalla (1993) 1 SCC 566 at paragraph 11, Duroflex Coir Industries Ltd. v. CST 1993 Supp (1) SCC 568 at paragraph 2, State of Karnataka v. G. Seenappa 1993 Supp (1) SCC 648 at paragraph 3 and Bonam Satyavathi v. Addala Raghavulu 1994 Supp (2) SCC 556 at paragraph 4). This is all the more applicable in the case of tax statutes where persons arrange their affairs on the basis of the legal position as it exists.

