Precedent Referred : 11. Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned Addl. Solicitor General substantively urged on the premise that there was no mandatory requirement to obtain CVO's advice before initiating disciplinary proceedings. More so, this procedural requirement was co-relatable to vigilance cases alone. In the alternative, it was urged that this, in any case, would not vitiate the entire proceedings as the administrative rules, regulations and instructions would not have statutory force and would not give rise to any legal rights in favour of any parties. In this behalf, reliance was placed in the judgment of Union of India and ors. vs. Alok Kumar (2010) 5 SCC 349 where a pari materia circular of the Central Vigilance Commission was considered. In that behalf, it was opined that the test which is to be applied is whether any prejudice was caused to the employee by not obtaining of the CVC's advice at the first stage. It was concluded that no prejudice had been caused in that case.

Precedent Referred : 12. Learned ASG also made a reference to Chief Commercial Manager, South Central Railway, Secunderabad & Ors. vs. G. Ratnam & Ors. (2007) 8 SCC 212 In the given facts of the case, Indian Railways Vigilance Manual, 1996, more specifically paras 704 and 705, were examined qua the instructions contained therein and the consequence of non-compliance thereof by the investigating officer dealing with the departmental trap. The instructions were held to be procedural in character and not of a substantive nature and they were meant not for the delinquent officer but for guidance of the investigating officer. Thus, a violation thereof ipso facto was held not to vitiate the departmental proceedings.

Precedent Relied : 13. On the other hand, the respondent, who appeared in-person, contended that the Circular was statutory in nature as it was issued under the authority of the Central Vigilance Commission, being a statutory body. Thus, the procedure prescribed by the Circular and Rule 12(v) of the Postal Manual Vol. III was mandatory, which was not complied with. The respondent relied on a few judgments in this behalf Veerender Kumar Dubey v. Chief of Army Staff (2016) 2 SCC 627; Moni Shankar v. Union of India (2008) 3 SCC 484; Jt. Action Committee of Airlines v. Director General of Civil Aviation (2011) 5 SCC 435; A.N. Sehgal & Ors. v. Raje Ram Sheoran 1992 Supp.(1) SCC 304; Union of India v. K.P. Joseph & Ors. (1973) 1 SCC 194; Chief Commercial Manager v. G. Ratnam (2007) 8 SCC 212. It may be observed that the same were generic in character on the point of non compliance with executive instructions. Thus, if procedural safeguards are provided, these judgments note, the same should be observed as they prevent any arbitrary exercise of power. In fact, in one of the cases, the expression used is "a departmental instruction cannot totally be ignored" Moni Shankar case (supra) [emphasis supplied]. The principle propounded was that any wanton or deliberate deviation in implementation of the rules could breed indiscipline among the services and amount to undue favour to some while denial of equality among many A.N. Sehgal case (supra). Suffice to say, that in order that such executive instructions have force of statutory rules, it must be shown that they have been issued under the authority conferred on the Central Government or the State Government by some statutes or under some provisions of the Constitution providing therefore Chief Commercial Manager case (supra).

Precedent Referred : 19. It is correct to say that judicial forums do not sit as an appellate authority to substitute their mind with the mind of the disciplinary authority insofar as the finding is concerned. However, disproportionality of punishment is a concept certainly not unknown to service jurisprudence and has received consideration inter alia of this Court S.R. Tewari v. Union of India and Anr. (2013) 6 SCC 602. This is what the Tribunal proposed to do. We may examine the finding of the Tribunal on the issue of disproportionality of punishment and are in complete agreement with the view that the punishment of compulsory retirement was completely disproportionate and harsh, keeping in mind the finding arrived at by the disciplinary authority. It, thus, seems to appear that the charges originally levelled may have persuaded the concerned authority to impose punishment; losing site of the fact that the allegations qua bribery had not been found against the respondent.

