Precedent Referred : 13. The appellant relied on Hardeep Singh Vs. State of Punjab & Ors. (2014) 3 SCC 92, paras 42 to 45 wherein, though the dispute related to the interpretation of the provisions of Section 319 of the Cr.P.C., what is relevant is the proposition sought to be laid down. It held that it was a settled principle of law that if an interpretation leads to a conclusion that the word used by the legislature is redundant, that should be avoided as the presumption is that the legislature has deliberately and consciously used the word of carrying out the purpose of the Act. The legal maxim a verbis legis non est recedendum which means, "from the words of law, there must be no departure" has to be kept in mind. There could be no assumption that a legislature committed a mistake when the language of the statute was plain and ambiguous. No word in a Statute has to be construed as a surplusage nor could any word be rendered ineffective or purposeless if the Court required to carry out the legislative intent fully and completely.

Precedent Relied : 18. Learned counsel supported his contention by reference to certain judicial pronouncements. On the principle of how the persons in the merit list, irrespective of their community, would not affect the reservation as they would be adjusted against the general candidates were supported by the judicial pronouncement in Rajesh Kumar Daria vs. Rajasthan Public Service Commission and Ors. (2007) 8 SCC 785. In para 9 of the judgment, the difference between the nature of vertical reservation and horizontal reservation has been highlighted to opine that the candidates belonging to the backward class may compete for non reserved posts for which they are appointed on merit, their number will not be counted against quota reserved for respective backward classes. This is stated to be the consistent view starting from the judgment in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217, R.K. Sabharwal vs. State of Punjab (1995) 2 SCC 745, Union of India vs. Virpal Singh Chauhan (1995) 6 SCC 684 and Ritesh R Sah Vs. Dr. Y.L. Yamul (1996) 3 SCC 253. This principle does not to apply for horizontal (special) reservations. For example, where a special reservation for women is provided within the social reservation for Scheduled Castes, the proper procedure is first to fill up the quota for Scheduled Castes in order of merit and then find out the number of candidates among them who belong to the special reservation group of "Scheduled Caste women". If the number of women in such list is equal to or more than the number of special reservation quota, then there is no need for further selection towards the special reservation quota. Only if there is any shortfall, the requisite number of Scheduled Caste women shall have to be taken by deleting the corresponding number of candidates from the bottom of the list relating to Scheduled Castes.

Precedent Relied : 19. A similar view has been taken in Anil Kumar Gupta & Ors. vs. State of U.P. & Ors. (1995) 5 SCC 173 by opining on the basis of the judgment in Indra Sawhney's case (supra) that the proper and correct course is to first fill up the open quota seats on the basis of merit, and then fill up each of the social reservation quotas. If the quota fixed for horizontal reservations is already satisfied, no further question would arise while dealing with such horizontal reservations (which is not the case in the present appeals).

Precedent Relied : 20. Learned counsel also sought to contend that insofar as Tamil Nadu is concerned, the matter was settled long time back by the judgment of the High Court in K.R. Shanthi vs. Secretary to Government, Education Department, Chennai & Anr. (2012) 7 MLJ 241 paras 14, 18 and 19, incidentally authored by S. Nagamuthu, J., as he then was, though of course the principle of promissory estopple cannot apply while he raises his contentions!. It was clearly observed that candidates selected on merit under open quota should not be adjusted against reserved vacancy and the inter se seniority of candidates selected and appointed in that selection should be only on merit and not on the basis of roster points. It would be relevant to extract the steps which were opined as required to be taken and set out in para 14:

Precedent Referred : 21. Lastly, referring to the recent judgment of this Court in Saurav Yadav and Ors. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. 2020 SCC OnLine SC 1034. This judgment again set forth the steps to be taken while implementing this list in para 14 as under:

Precedent Relied : "14. The observations in the Order dated 20.02.2019 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Pramod Kumar Singh v. State of U.P. (2012) 7 MLJ 241 paras 14, 18 and 19, incidentally authored by S. Nagamuthu, J., as he then was, though of course the principle of promissory estopple cannot apply while he raises his contentions! are also relied upon by the State Government. In that case the horizontal reservation for dependants of Freedom Fighters, Ex. Servicemen and women in the very same selection for Police Constables was in issue. The Division Bench of the High Court dealt with the Note submitted on behalf of the State which indicated the steps undertaken to determine and fill up seats for various categories as under:-

