Precedent Referred : 19. Learned counsel in support of her arguments relied on judgment of this Court in the case of W.B.Freedom Fighters' Organization v. Union of India and Others 2004(7)SCC 716 and also the judgment in the case of Union of India v. Bikash R. Bhowmik and Others 2004(7)SCC 722.

Precedent Referred : 21. While drawing our attention to the Order dated 26.04.2019, passed in Special Leave Petition (C) No.11132 of 2019 (Diary No.2923 of 2019), it is submitted that similar petition is already dismissed by this Court and further, relying on the judgment of this Court in the case of Union of India v. Sitakant S. Dubhashi and Anr. 2020(3)SCC 297, learned Counsel has submitted that there is no illegality in the impugned order passed by the High Court and there are no grounds to interfere with the same.

Precedent Referred : 26. In any event, when such serious factual disputes emerge for consideration, the High Court ought not to have disposed of the petition filed by the Respondent without even issuing notice and giving opportunity to file counter affidavit to rebut the allegations made by the appellant. The judgments of this Court, relied on by the learned Additional Solicitor General in the case of W.B.Freedom Fighters' Organization v. Union of India and Others 2004(7)SCC 716 and in the case of Union of India v. Bikash R. Bhowmik and Others 2004(7)SCC 722 will support the plea of the appellant. In the case of W.B.Freedom Fighters' Organization v. Union of India and Others, this Court has held that when the competent committee has considered and opined that the applications were not supported by required documents and rejected the application, this Court cannot interfere with the same and such findings cannot be said to be perverse or unreasonable.

Precedent Referred : 27. Further, in the case of Union of India vs. Bikash R. Bhowmik and Others 2004(7)SCC 722, this Court has held that the pension under Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme of 1980 can be sanctioned as per the proof required under the scheme and in no other manner. In the said judgment, this Court has reversed the order passed by the High Court.

Precedent Relied : 31. Though, the learned Counsel appearing for the respondent - Writ Petitioner has placed reliance on the order passed by this Court in rejecting the Special Leave Petition in limine and also, further, judgment of this Court in the case of Union of India v. Sitakant S. Dubhashi and Anr. 2020(3)SCC 297, we are of the view that the order passed by this Court and also the judgment in the case of Union of India v. Sitakant S. Dubhashi and Anr. would not render any assistance in support of his claim. Whether a particular applicant is entitled for pension under the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme of 1980, is a matter which is required to be considered having regard to facts and documentary evidence produced in each case, as such, the judgment relied on by the learned counsel is of no assistance to support his case.

