Precedent Referred : 17. Relying upon the judgment in Desh Bandhu Gupta v. Delhi Stock Exchange (1979) 4 SCC 565, it was argued that the conditions spelt out in the advertisement as the eligibility norms for purposes of recruitment had to be given effect to. Further, relying upon the subsequent decision of this Court in N.P.N. Devin Katti v. Karnataka Public Service Commission (1990) 3 SCC 157, learned senior counsel urged that the criteria and conditions spelt out in the advertisement would continue to bind the State till the end of the selection or the recruitment, as the case may be, and any intervening and subsequent change in the rule position would not affect the ongoing recruitment process. It was subsequently urged, therefore, that since the advertisement was issued on 15.03.2016, the subsequent amendment which came into force on 26.07.2016 could not be made applicable. In short, it was urged that the State was bound by the standards it prescribed - in this case, the conditions spelt out in the advertisement never stated that to be considered eligible, a qualified and registered ANM should have completed or graduated with intermediate/10+2 examination in the Science stream.

Precedent Relied : 29. This court holds to be unmerited, the arguments of the appellant that the state was bound by the criteria specified in the advertisement issued by it in March 2016, even though Clause 7 of that notification clearly specified that the recruitments for ANMs would be in accordance with the statutory rules. The omission to mention the relevant qualifications (i.e. intermediate or equivalent qualification with the science stream) did not relieve the state from its obligation to follow existing rules. It has not been disputed that the 1997 Rules, after amendment in 1998, mandated that candidates desirous of being recruited as ANM or Health Workers had to possess educational qualifications including Intermediate pass (or its equivalent) with the science stream, apart from the necessary ANM certificate course. That condition remained unchanged even after the creation of the State of Uttarakhand. It was only in 2016, after the advertisement for the concerned recruitment was published, that the rules were changed; the changed new rules relieved the requirement of having to qualify the Intermediate level with science subjects, for the period 2010-2013 and thereafter, after July 2016. For all other periods, the basic educational qualification of intermediate or equivalent pass with a mandatory science stream qualification, remained an essential condition. Therefore, the argument that the state was bound by the standards it specified (in the advertisement which had omitted any mention as to the educational qualification of intermediate with science) did not relieve the state from the obligation of enforcing statutory rules. It is too late in the day to assert that any kind of estoppel can operate against the state to compel it to give effect to a promise contrary to law or prevailing rules that have statutory force. All arguments to this effect on the part of the appellants are therefore rejected. Furthermore, it is useful to recollect that the eligibility of a candidate or applicant for a public post or service, is to be adjudged as on the last date of receipt of applications for such post or service, in terms of the relevant advertisement, and the prevailing service rules. This position is recognized by settled authority; in Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekhar (1997) 4 SCC 18 a three-judge bench of this court ruled, in this context that:

Precedent Referred : 30. In regard to the argument that the statutory rules framed by the erstwhile State of UP as applicable to the State of Uttarakhand, were contrary to the provisions of the INC Act, this court holds the submission to be insubstantial and unmerited. The objective of the INC Act - as indeed its provisions testify - are to set up a central council, i.e. the Nursing Council, committed to evolving uniform standards for nursing education in the country, and to provide for recognition of degrees and qualifications of institutions and courses that cater to nursing. In the discharge of its functions, the INC has prescribed a mandatory ANM course with a minimum training requirement. It is undisputed that all the appellants did undergo, at various points in time, education and training from such recognized institutions. However, that is not the end of the matter. The state in its legitimate role as a public employer, is empowered by virtue of the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, to frame appropriate rules. These rules can prescribe conditions of service for various posts, classes of posts, and services under the state. The conditions may include a minimum educational qualification which the state deems appropriate for a candidate to possess before he or she can compete for a particular post at the stage of recruitment. That the INC Act allows the council to prescribe standards for education, which it legitimately exercises for the purposes of recognizing nursing courses, in no way detracts or undermines the authority of the state to prescribe other eligibility conditions which candidates can and should possess as a condition precedent for recruitment purposes, in the exercise of its power under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution. As held in Sanjay Kumar Manjul v. UPSC (2006) 8 SCC 42.

