Precedent Relied : Ahuja Vs. V.K.Vohra that, In the case of a Director or an officer of the company who signed the cheque on behalf of the company, there is no need to make a specific averment that he was in charge of and was responsible to the company, for the conduct of the business of the company or make any specific allegation about consent, connivance or negligence.

Precedent Referred : The very fact that the dishonoured cheque was signed by him on behalf of the company, would give rise to responsibility under Sub- Section (2) of Section 141,the same view was followed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Standard Chartered Bank Vs. State of Maharashtra.The accused being signatory of the cheque is aware of the transaction and therefore liable to be prosecute for the offence.

Precedent Relied : The case law relied upon learned counsel for the applicant are not applicable to the present case, in view of the latest judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Standard Chartered Bank Vs. State of Maharashtra.Further, perusal of the complaint shows that the complaint has been filed u/s 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act against M/s Instyle Exports Pvt.

Precedent Referred : It has been held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Vijay Malya Vs. Delhi International Airport Authority that, notice issued to accused company was sufficient and no separate notice was required to be issued individually to the persons mentioned in Section 141 of the Act.Further, it has been held by Hon'ble Madras High Court in Sarvaraya Textiles Limited case that notice issued to the complainant which is principal offender is notice to all the persons coming under the purview of the Section 141(1) and (2) of the Negotiable Instruments Act.

Precedent Referred : Sharad Kumar Sanghi Versus Sangita Rane, 2015 (2) ACR 1457 SC, N.Harihara Krishnan Vs. J. Thomas, Criminal Appeal No.1534 of 2017, Anita Hada Vs. God Father Travels and Tours Pvt.Ltd., 2012(2) RCR(Crl.)

Precedent Referred : Standard Chartered Bank Vs. State of Maharashtra and Others etc., Criminal Appeal Nos.271-273 of 2016 and Bhushan Kumar Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and Anr., 2012(2) ACR 1514, those do not find application to the present case due to different facts and circumstances and the context in which such observations had been made.20 Whereas the judgment relied upon by learned counsel for the respondent-complainant Kirshna Texport and Capital Markets Ltd.

