Precedent Relied : Hon'ble Supreme Court had held in its th judgment rendered on 29th November, 2006 in M/ s. Transcore v. Union of India and Anr., Appeal (civil) 3228 of 2006, that 'borrower' includes a 'pledgor'.That it was observed that Section 2(f) of the SARFAESI Act defines the word borrower to mean the principal borrower who is granted financial assistance by any bank or Financial Institution and includes a guarantor, a mortgagor as well as a pledgor.

Precedent Relied : (a) of the petitioner being liable in view of dicta in Transcore v. Union of India (2008) 1 SCC 125 : (AIR 2007 SC 712); and, (b) the petitioner, even as pawnor, under Section 176 of the Contract Act being liable for the entire debt.While giving time to the petitioner to address on the said aspect, notice of the petition was also issued, besides to the respondent No.1 Bank, also to the respondent No.2 Company, informed to be then under insolvency, through Mr. Kiran Shah, Liquidator appointed by the National Company Law Tribunal.

Precedent Referred : Group Industries 2002 SCC OnLine Ker 228 (DB) : (2002 CLC 1208 (Ker)); (f) Indian Overseas Bank v. R.M.Marketing and Services Pvt.

Precedent Referred : Ltd. 2001 SCC OnLine Del 536 : (AIR 2002 Del 344); (g) Tristar Consultants v. VCustomer Services India Pvt.Ltd. 139 (2007) DLT 688 : (AIR 2007 Del 157); (h) A.P.

Precedent Relied : Ltd. v. Namedi Leasing and Finance Ltd. 2018 SCC OnLine Del 8142; and, (C) STCI Finance Ltd. v. Cedar Infonet Pvt.Ltd. 2018 SCC OnLine Del 8841 : (AIROnline 2018 Del 827); (xvii) the respondent No.1 Bank, before this Court also has filed a counter- affidavit to the writ petition and in the said counter- affidavit, for the first time has disclosed that the respondent No.1 Bank, on 6th April, 2010 had invoked the pledge of shares and that the pledged shares stand transferred from the depository of the petitioner to the depository of the respondent No.1 Bank; (xviii) the respondent No.1 Bank, in the counter- affidavit filed in this Court also has not pleaded or disclosed any document on the basis whereof it can be said that the writ petitioner is the borrower of the respondent No.1 Bank or is the guarantor or surety of the borrowing of the respondent No.2 Company from the respondent No.1 Bank; and, (xix) there is no judgment in which the question, as has been raised by this Court as to the interpretation of Section 176 of the Contract Act, has been decided; however (a) Pushpanjali Tie Up Pvt.

Precedent Relied : 124 (DB) : (AIR 2015 Bom 1); (b) ICICI Securities Primary Dealership Ltd. v. Goodwill Enterprise Limited MANU/MH/1344/2020; and, (c) Phoenix ARC Private Limited v. Ketulbhai Ramubhai Patel (2021) 2 SCC 799 : (AIR 2021 SC 875) deal with cases of pledges of shares; and, (A) State Bank of India v. N. Sathiah AIR 1989 Mad 279 (DB); and (B) Lallan Prasad v. Rahmat Ali AIR 1967 SC 1322, deal with pledges of goods, and are relied upon to aid in interpretation of Section 176 of the Contract Act.7.The counsel for the respondent No.1 Bank has argued that, (i) in ICICI Securities Primary Dealership Ltd. supra cited by the senior counsel for the petitioner, though recovery proceedings against the defendant No.5 therein were set aside but not against the defendants No.2 to 4 therein who though stood similarly situated as defendant No.5, had not appeared and had been proceeded ex parte and recovery ordered against them; the petitioner herein also, in spite of service did not appear before the DRT and was proceeded against ex parte and thus no fault can be found with the order of the DRT in directing recovery, besides against the respondent No.2 Company also against the petitioner; (ii) though there is no Deed of Personal Guarantee executed by the petitioner in the present case but the petitioner, in the Share Pledge Agreement, admittedly signed by him, in Clause 2.1 agreed thatThis Agreement is for the benefit of the Bank, to secure the due performance, payment and discharge in full of the Obligations, and in order to secure the Obligations.....; (iii)Obligations, in the said Share Pledge Agreement was defined as meaning all amounts payable to the Bank by the borrower and thus,Obligorsmeant, the borrower and the pledgor collectively; thus the petitioner, in the Share Pledge Agreement, vide Clause 2.1 undertook to discharge the entire debt held by the respondent No.2 Company to the respondent No.1 Bank; (iv) the petitioner, when appeared before the Recovery Officer of the DRT on 28th January, 2014 and 3rd March, 2014, admitted liability by seeking time to pay the amount of which recovery had been ordered; the petitioner thereby admitted to be liable along with the respondent No.2 Company and cannot now deny the same; no challenge has been made by the petitioner to the orders dated 28th January, 2014 and 3rd March, 2014 of the Recovery Officer; (v) the said admission of the petitioner read with Clause 2.1 aforesaid of the Share Pledge Agreement contains an agreement of the petitioner to be liable jointly and severally with the respondent No.2 Company for the dues of the respondent No.1 Bank; (vi) though this Court vide order dated 17 August, 2020 directed the petitioner to file additional affidavit containing particulars of promoters of the respondent No.2 Company and disclosing how the petitioner came to occupy the position of Director/Managing Director of the respondent No.2 Company but the petitioner, in the additional affidavit filed, has shied away from disclosing all the said particulars and the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on this ground as well; (vii) DRT, in its ex parte order, ordered recovery against the petitioner on the basis of the pleas and evidence of the respondent No.1 Bank, of the petitioner, under his signatures, on behalf of the respondent No.2 Company, having issued a cheque in the sum of Rs.10,01,06,401/- for repayment of dues of the respondent No.1 Bank; (viii) the petitioner, in his letter dated 27th July, 2010 only claimed to have resigned from the Managing Directorship of the respondent No.2 Company but did not plead that he was not liable for the dues; (ix) the petitioner is guilty of delay and laches at each and every stage; the petitioner was duly served with the notice of the OA before the DRT but chose to be proceeded against ex parte; the petitioner preferred Review Application as well as appeal before the DRAT, after long delay; even this writ petition has been filed after long delay from the impugned order of the DRAT; and, (x) the petitioner, in this petition has falsely pleaded that the shares which were pledged, belonged to Global Asia Partner LLC and that the pledge was not in his personal capacity; attention is drawn to various documents, particularly the Share Pledge Agreement and pleadings where the petition has admitted pledge in his personal capacity and it is argued that the petitioner, in the writ petition having taken false pleas contrary to the documents and its pleadings earlier, is not entitled to any relief.8.

Precedent Relied : Supreme Court, in State of Maharashtra v. M.N.Kaul, AIR 1967 SC 1634, while answering the question whether the guarantee subject- matter thereof was enforceable, held,That depends upon the terms under which the guarantor bound himself.

Precedent Relied : It was however again emphasised thatthe cardinal rule is that the guarantor must not be made liable beyond the terms of his agreement.In Central Bank of India v. Viru-dhunagar Steel Rolling Mills Ltd. (2015) 16 SCC 207 : (AIR 2016 SC 191), finding that the letters of guarantee signed by the directors of the company did not make any mention of any old transactions, it was held that had the intent been to make the directors personally liable for the outstanding liabilities of the company also, it could have been so provided in the letter of guarantee and the directors were thus not personally liable for the dues of prior to the date they signed the letter of guarantee.It was further held that since the deed of guarantee was drafted by the bank, in case of doubt, had to be read against the bank.

Precedent Relied : Mention may also be made of Global Infosystem Ltd. v. Lunar Finance Ltd., MANU/ DE/2664/2012, where a Single Judge of this Court was concerned with the question whether Lunar Finance Ltd. was only a pledgor of certain shares or also a guarantor.Finding Lunar Finance Ltd. to have been described, in the 'Agreement-cum-Pledge' Deed as the 'guarantor' and further finding Lunar Finance Ltd., to have in the Resolution of its Board of Directors consented to guarantee and to make a pledge, it was held that Lunar Finance Ltd. was guarantor for the entire debt and not to the extent only of value of the shares pledged.12.

